Inasmuch as the sudden flight had scattered them over the plain, turned to the mount whereto reason spurs us,
I drew me close to my trusty companion. And how should I without him have run? Who would have drawn me up over the mountain?
He seemed to me of his own self remorseful. O conscience, upright and stainless, how bitter a sting to thee is little fault!
When his feet left the haste that takes the seemliness from every act, my mind, which at first had been restrained,
let loose its attention, as though eager, and I turned my face unto the hill that towards the heaven rises highest from the sea.
The sun, which behind was flaming ruddy, was broken in front of me by the figure that the staying of its rays upon me formed.
When I saw the ground darkened only in front of me, I turned me to my side with fear of being abandoned:
and my Comfort, wholly turning to me, began to say, “Why dost thou still distrust? Dost thou not believe me with thee, and that I guide thee?
It is now evening there where the body is buried within which I cast a shadow; Naples holds it, and from Brundusium it is taken;
if now in front of me there is no shadow, marvel not more than at the heavens of which one hinders not the other’s radiance.
To suffer torments, both hot and cold, bodies like this the Power ordains, which wills not that how it acts be revealed to us.
Mad is he who hopes that our reason can traverse the infinite way which One Substance in Three Persons holds.
Be content, human race, with the quia;; for if ye had been able to see everything, need had not been for Mary to hear child:
and ye have seen desiring fruitlessly men such that their desire would have been quieted, which is given them eternally for a grief.
I speak of Aristotle and of Plato, and of many others;” and here he bowed his front, and said no more, and remained disturbed.
We had come, meanwhile, to the foot of the mountain; here we found the rock so steep, that there the legs would be agile in vain.
Between Lerici and Turbia the most deserted, the most secluded way is a stair easy and open, compared with that.
“Now who knows on which hand the hillside slopes,” said my Master, staying his step, “so that he can ascend who goeth without wings?”
And while he was holding his face low, questioning his mind about the road, and I was looking up around the rock,
on the left hand appeared to me a company of souls who were moving their feet towards us, and seemed not, so slowly were they coming.
“Lift,” said I to the Master, “thine eyes, lo! on this side who will give us counsel, if thou from thyself canst not have it.”
He looked at them, and with air of relief, answered, “Let us go thither, for they come slowly, and do thou confirm thy hope, sweet son.
That people was still as far, I mean after a thousand steps of ours, as a good thrower would cast with his hand,
when they all pressed up to the hard masses of the high bank, and stood still and close, as one who goes in doubt stops to look.
“O ye who have made good ends, O spirits already elect,” Virgil began, “by that peace which I believe is awaited by you all,
tell us, where the mountain lies so that the going up is possible; for to lose time is most displeasing to him who knows most.”
As the sheep come forth from the fold by ones, and twos, and threes, and the others stand timid, holding eye and muzzle to the ground;
and what the first does the others also do, huddling themselves to her if she stop, silly and quiet, and wherefore know not;
so I saw then moving to approach, the head of that fortunate flock, modest in face and dignified in gait.
When those in front saw the light broken on the ground at my right side, so that the shadow fell from me on the cliff,
they stopped, and drew somewhat back; and all the rest who were coming behind, not knowing why, did just the same.
“Without your asking, I confess to you that this is a human body which you see, whereby the light of the sun on the ground is cleft.
Marvel not thereat, but believe that not without power that comes from heaven he seeks to surmount this wall.”
Thus the Master:and that worthy people said, “Turn, enter in advance, then;” with the backs of their hands making sign.
And one of them began, “Whoever thou art, turn thy face as thou thus goest; consider if in the world thou didst ever see me?”
I turned me toward him, and looked at him fixedly: blond he was, and beautiful, and of gentle aspect, but a blow had divided one of his eyebrows.
When I had humbly disclaimed having ever seen him, he said, “Now look!” and he showed me a wound at the top of his breast.
Then he said, smiling, “I am Manfred, grandson of the Empress Constance; wherefore I pray thee, that when thou returnest,
thou go to my beautiful daughter, mother of the honor of Sicily and of Aragon, and tell to her the truth if aught else be told.
After I had my body broken by two mortal stabs, I rendered myself, weeping, to Him who pardons willingly.
Horrible were my sins, but the Infinite Goodness has such wide arms that it takes whatever turns to it.
If the Pastor of Cosenza, who was set on the hunt of me by Clement, had then rightly read this page in God,
the bones of my body would still be at the head of the bridge near Benevento, under the guard of the heavy cairn.
Now the rain bathes them, and the wind moves them forth from the kingdom, almost along the Verde, whither he transferred them with extinguished light.
By their malediction the Eternal Love is not so lost that it cannot return, while hope hath speck of green.
True is it, that whoso dies in contumacy of Holy Church, though he repent him at the end, needs must stay outside upon this bank
thirtyfold the whole time that he has been in his presumption, if such decree become not shorter through good prayers.
See now if thou canst make me glad, revealing to my good Constance how thou hast seen me, and also this prohibition,
for here through those on earth much is gained.”
