When through delights, or through pains which some power of ours may experience, the soul is all concentrated thereon,
it seems that to no other faculty it may attend; and this is counter to the error which believes that one soul above another is kindled in us.
And therefore, when a thing is heard or seen, which may hold the soul intently turned to it, the time passes, and the man observes it not:
for one faculty is that which listens, and another is that which keeps the soul entire; the latter is as it were bound, and the former is loosed.
Of this had I true experience, hearing that spirit and wondering; for full fifty degrees had the sun ascended,
and I had not noticed it, when we came where those souls all together cried out to us, “Here is what you ask.”
A larger opening the man of the farm often hedges up with a forkful of his thorns, when the grape grows dark,
than was the passage through which my Leader and I behind ascended alone, when the troop departed from us.
One goes to Sanleo, and descends to Noli, one mounts up Bismantova to its peak, with only the feet; but here it behoves that one fly,
I mean with the swift wings and with the feathers of great desire, behind that guide who gave me hope and made a light for me.
We ascended in through the broken rock, and on each side the border pressed on us, and the ground beneath required both feet and hands.
When we were upon the upper edge of the high bank on the open slope, “My Master,” said I, “what way shall we take?”
And he to me, “Let no step of thine fall back, always win up the mountain behind me, till some sage guide appear for us.”
The summit was so high it surpassed the sight and the side steeper far than a line from the mid quadrant to the centre.
I was weary, when I began, “O sweet Father, turn and regard howl remain alone if thou dost not stop.”
“My son,” said he, “far as here drag thyself,” pointing me to a ledge a little above, which on that side circles all the hill.
His words so spurred me, that I forced myself, scrambling after him, until the belt was beneath my feet.
There we both sat down, turning to the east, whence we had ascended, for to look back is wont to encourage one.
I first turned my eyes to the low shores, then I raised them to the sun, and wondered that on the left we were struck by it.
The Poet perceived clearly that I was standing all bewildered at the chariot of the light, where between us and Aquilo, it was entering.
Whereupon he to me, “If Castor and Pollux were in company with that mirror which up and down guides with its light,
thou wouldst see the ruddy Zodiac revolving still closer to the Bears, if it went not out of its old road.
How that may be, if thou wishest to be able to think, collected in thyself imagine Zion and this mountain to stand upon the earth
so that both have one sole horizon, and different hemispheres; the road which Phaethon, to his harm, knew not how to drive,
then thou wilt see that must needs pass on the one side of this mountain, and on the other side of that, if thy intelligence right clearly heeds.”
“Surely, my Master,” said I, “never yet saw I so clearly, as I now discern there where my wit seemed deficient;
for the mid-circle of the supernal motion, which is called Equator in a certain art, and which always remains between the sun and the winter,
for the reason that thou tellest, from here departs toward the north, while the Hebrews saw it toward the warm region.
But, if it please thee, willingly I would know how far we have to go, for the hill rises higher than my eyes can rise.”
And he to me, “This mountain is such, that ever at the beginning below it is hard, and the higher one goes the less it hurts;
therefore when it shall seem so pleasant to thee that the going up will be easy to thee as going down the current in a vessel,
then wilt thou be at the end of this path; there repose from toil await: no more I answer, and this I know for true.”
And when he had said his word, a voice near by sounded, “Perchance thou wilt be first constrained to sit.”
At the sound of it each of us turned, and we saw at the left a great stone which neither he nor I before had noticed.
Thither we drew; and there were persons who were staying in the shadow behind the rock, as one through indolence sets himself to stay.
And one of them, who seemed to me weary, was seated, and was clasping his knees, holding his face down low between them.
“O sweet my Lord,” said I, “look at him who shows himself more indolent than if sloth were his sister.”
Then that one turned to us and gave heed, moving his look only up along his thigh, and said, “Now go up thou, for thou art valiant.”
I recognized then who he was, and that effort which was still quickening my breath a little hindered not my going to him, and after
I had reached him, he scarce raised his head, saying, “Hast thou clearly seen how the sun over thy left shoulder drives his chariot?”
His slothful acts and his short words moved my lips a little to a smile, then I began, “Belacqua, I do not grieve for thee now, but tell me why just here thou art seated?
awaitest thou a guide, or has only thy wonted mood recaptured thee?”
And he, “Brother, what imports the going up? For the bird of God that sitteth at the gate would not let me go to the torments.
It first behoves that heaven circle around me outside the gate, as long as it did in life, because I delayed good sighs until the end;
unless the prayer first aid me which rises up from a heart that lives in grace: what avails the other which is not heard in heaven?”
And now the Poet in front of me was ascending, and he said, “Come on now: thou seest that the meridian is touched by the sun, and on the shore
the night now covers with her foot Morocco.”
