When a game of dice is broken up,
he who loses remains sorrowful,
repeating the throws, and, saddened, learns;
with the other all the folk go along;
one goes before and one plucks him from behind,
and at his side one brings himself to mind.
He does not stop; listens to one and the other
the man to whom he reaches forth his hand presses on him no longer,
and thus from the throng he defends himself.
Such was I in that dense crowd,
turning my face to them this way and that;
and, promising, I loosed myself from them.
Here was the Aretine, who from the fierce arms
of Ghin di Tacco had his death;
and the other who was drowned when running in pursuit.
Here was praying with hands outstretched,
Federigo Novello, and he of Pisa,
who made the good Marzucco seem strong.
I saw Count Orso; and the soul divided
from its body by spite and by envy,
as it said, and not for fault committed,
Pierre do la Brosse, I mean; and here let take forethought,
the Lady of Brabant, while she is on earth,
so that for this she be not of the worse flock.
When I was free from each and all
those shades who prayed only that some one else should pray,
so that their becoming holy may be speeded,
I began, “It seems that thou deniest to me,
O Light of mine, expressly, in a certain text,
that orison can bend decree of Heaven,
and this folk pray only for this,—
shall then their hope be vain?
or is thy saying not rightly clear to me?
And he to me, “My writing is plain,
and the hope of these is not fallacious,
if well it is regarded with sound mind;
because top of judgment vails not itself
for a fire of love may, in one instant, fulfil
that which he who is stationed here must satisfy.
And there where I affirmed this proposition,
defect was not amended by a prayer,
because the prayer was disjoined from God.
But truly in regard to so deep a doubt
decide thou not, unless she tell thee
who shall be a light between the truth and the understanding.
I know not if thou understandest; I speak of Beatrice.
Thou shalt see her above, upon the summit
of this mountain, smiling and happy.”
And I, “My lord, let us go on with greater speed,
for now I mu not weary as before;
and behold now how the bill casts its shadow.”
“We will go forward with this day,”
he answered, “as much further as we shall yet be able;
but the fact is of other form than thou supposest.
Before thou art there-above thou wilt see him return,
who is now hidden by the hill-side
so that thou dost not make his rays to break.
But see there a soul which seated
all alone is looking toward us;
it will point out to us the speediest way.”
We came to it. O Lombard soul,
how lofty and scornful wast thou;
and in the movement of thine eyes grave and slow!
It said not anything to us,
but let us go on, looking only
in manner of a lion when he couches.
Virgil, however, drew near to it, praying
that it would show to us the best ascent;
and it answered not to his request,
but of our country and life
it asked us. And the sweet Leader began,
“Mantua,”—and the shade, all in itself recluse,
rose toward him from the place where erst it was,
saying, “O Mantuan, I am Sordello of thy city,”
—and they embraced each other.
Ah, servile Italy, hostel of grief!
ship without pilot in great tempest!
not lady of provinces, but a brothel!
that gentle soul was so ready,
only at the sweet sound of his native land,
to give glad welcome here unto his fellow-citizen:
and now in thee exist not without war,
thy living men, and one doth gnaw the other
of those whom one wall and one moat shut in.
Search, wretched one, around the shores
thy seaboard, and then look within thy bosom,
if any part in thee enjoyeth peace!
What avails it that for thee should mend the bridle,
Justinian, if the saddle be empty?
Without this, the shame would be less.
Ah folk, that oughtest to be devout
and let Caesar sit in the saddle,
if thou rightly understandest what God notes for thee!
Look how fell this wild beast has become,
through not being corrected by the spurs,
since thou didst put thy hand upon the bridle.
O German Albert, who abandonest
her who has become untamed and savage,
and oughtest to bestride her saddle-bows,
may a just judgment from the stars fall
upon thy blood, and may it be strange and manifest,
so that thy successor may have fear of it!
For thou and thy father have suffered,
retained up there by greed,
the garden of the empire to become desert.
Come thou to see Montecchi and Cappelletti,
Monaldi and Filippeschi, thou man without care:
those already wretched, and these in dread.
Come, cruel one, come, and see the distress
of thy nobility, and cure their hurts;
and thou shalt see Santafiora how safe it is.
Come to see thy Rome, that weeps,
widowed and alone, and day and night cries,
“My Caesar, wherefore dost thou not keep me company?”
Come to see the people, how loving it is;
and, if no pity for us move thee,
come to be shamed by thine own renown!
And if it be lawful for me, O Supreme Jove
that wast on earth crucified for us,
are thy just eyes turned aside elsewhere?
Or is it preparation, that in the abyss
of thy counsel thou art making for some good
utterly cut off from our perception?
For the cities of Italy are all full
of tyrants, and becomes a Marcellus
every churl that comes playing the partisan?
My Florence! surely thou mayst be content
with this digression, which toucheth thee not,
thanks to thy people that for itself takes heed.
Many have justice at heart but shoot slowly,
in order not to come without counsel to the bow;
but thy people has it on the edge of its lips.
Many reject the common burden,
but thy people, eager, replies
without being called on, and cries, “I load myself.”
Now be thou glad, for thou hast truly wherefore:
thou rich, thou in peace, thou wise.
If I speak the truth, the result hides it not.
Athens and Lacedaemon, that made
the ancient laws and were so civilized,
made toward living well a little sign,
compared with thee that makest such finespun
provisions, that to mid November
reaches not, what thou in October spinnest.
How often in the time that thou rememberest,
law, money, office, and custom,
hast thou changed, and renewed thy members!
And if thou mind thee well and see the light,
thou wilt see thyself resembling a sick woman,
who cannot find repose upon the feathers,
but with her tossing seeks to relieve her pain.
