It was now the hour that turns back desire in those that sail the sea, and softens their hearts, the day when they have said to their sweet friends farewell,
and which pierces the new pilgrim with love, if he hears from afar a bell that seems to deplore the dying day,—
when I began to render hearing vain, and to look at one of the souls who, uprisen, besought attention with its hand.
It joined and raised both its palms, fixing its eyes toward the orient, as if it said to God, “For aught else I care not.” “Te lucis ante” so devoutly issued from his mouth and with such sweet notes that it made me issue forth from my own mind. And then the others sweetly and devoutly accompanied it through all the hymn to the end, having their eyes upon the supernal wheels. Here, reader, sharpen well thine eyes for the truth, for the veil is now indeed so thin that surely passing through within is easy.
Te locis ante terminum, Rerom Creator poscimus, Ut tus pro clementia Sis presul et custodia:—
“Before the close of light,
we pray thee, O Creator,
that through thy clemency, thou be our watch and guard.”
I saw that army of the gentle-born silently thereafter gazing upward as if in expectation, pallid and humble;
and I saw issuing from on high and descending two angels, with two fiery swords truncated and deprived of their points.
Green as leaflets just now born were their garments, which, beaten and blown by their green pinions, they trailed behind.
One came to stand a little above us, and the other descended on the opposite bank, so that the people were contained between them.
I clearly discerned in them their blond heads, but on their faces the eye was dazzled, as a faculty which is confounded by excess.
“Both come from the bosom of Mary,” said Sordello, “for guard of the valley, because of the serpent that will come straightway.”
Whereat I, who knew not by what path, turned me round, and all chilled drew me close to the trusty shoulders.
And Sordello again, “Now let us go down into the valley among the great shades, and we will speak to them; well pleasing will it be to them to see you.”
Only three steps I think I had descended and I was below; and I saw one who was gazing only at me as if he wished to know me.
It was now the time when the air was darkening, but not so that between his eyes and mine it did not reveal that which it locked up before.
Towards me he moved, and I moved towards him. Gentle Judge Nino, how much it pleased me when I saw that thou wast not among the damned!
No fair salutation was silent between us; then he asked, “How long is it since thou camest to the foot of the mountain across the far waters?”
“Oh,” said I to him, “from within the dismal places I came this morning, and I am in the first life, albeit in going thus, I may gain the other.”
And when my answer was heard, Sordello and he drew themselves back like folk suddenly bewildered,
the one to Virgil, and the other turned to one who was seated there, crying, “Up, Corrado, come to see what God through grace hath willed.”
Then, turning to me, “By that singular gratitude thou owest unto Him who so hides His own first wherefore that there is no ford to it,
when thou shalt be beyond the wide waves, say to my Joan, that for me she cry there where answer is given to the innocent.
I do not think her mother loves me longer, since she changed her white wimples, which she, wretched, needs must desire again.
Through her easily enough is comprehended how long the fire of love lasts in woman, if eye or touch does not often rekindle it.
The viper which leads afield the Milanese will not make for her so fair a sepulture as the cock of Gallura would have done.”
Thus he said, marked in his aspect with the stamp of that upright zeal which in due measure glows in the heart.
My greedy eyes were going ever to the sky, ever there where the stars are slowest, even as a wheel nearest the axle.
And my Leader, “Son, at what lookest thou up there?” And I to him, “At those three torches with which the pole on this side is all aflame.”
And he to me, “The four bright stars which thou sawest this morning are low on the other side, and these are risen where those were.”
As he was speaking, lo! Sordello drew him to himself, saying, “See there our adversary,” and pointed his finger that he should look thither.
At that part where the little valley has no barrier was a snake, perhaps such as gave to Eve the bitter food.
Through the grass and the flowers came the evil trail, turning from time to time its head to its back, licking like a beast that sleeks itself.
I did not see, and therefore cannot tell how the celestial falcons moved, but I saw well both one and the other in motion.
Hearing the air cleft by their green wings the serpent fled, and the angels wheeled about, up to their stations flying back alike.
The shade which had drawn close to the Judge when he exclaimed, through all that assault had not for a moment loosed its gaze from me.
“So may the light that leadeth thee on high find in thine own free-will so much wax as is needed up to the enamelled summit,”
it began, “if thou knowest true news of Valdimacra or of the neighboring region, tell it to me, for formerly I was great there.
I was called Corrado Malaspina; I am not the ancient, but from him I am descended; to mine own I bore the love which here is refined.”
“Oh,” said I to him, “through your lands I have never been, but where doth man dwell in all Europe that they are not renowned?
The fame that honoreth your house proclaims its lords, proclaims its district, so that he knows of them who never yet was there;
and I swear to you, so may I go above, that your honored race doth not despoil itself of the praise of the purse and of the sword.
Custom and nature so privilege it that though the guilty head turn the world awry, alone it goes right and scorns the evil road.”
And he, “Now go, for the sun shall not lie seven times in the bed that the Ram covers and bestrides with all four feet,
before this courteous opinion will be nailed in the middle of thy head with greater nails than the speech of another,
if course of judgment be not arrested.”
