The concubine of old Tithonus was now gleaming white on the balcony of the orient, forth from the arms of her sweet friend;
her forehead was lucent with gems set in the shape of the cold animal that strikes people with its tail.
And in the place where we were the night had taken two of the steps with which she ascends, and the third was already bending down its wings,
when I, who had somewhat of Adam with me, overcome by sleep, reclined upon the grass, there where all five of us were seated.
At the hour near the morning when the little swallow begins her sad lays, perchance in memory of her former woes,
and when our mind, more a wanderer from the flesh and less captive to the thought, is in its visions almost divine,
in dream it seemed to me that I saw poised in the sky an eagle with feathers of gold, with wings widespread, and intent to stoop.
And it seemed to me that I was there where his own people were abandoned by Ganymede, when he was rapt to the supreme consistory.
In myself I thought, “Perhaps this bird strikes only here through wont, and perhaps from other place disdains to carry anyone upward in his feet.”
Then it seemed to me that, having wheeled a little, it descended terrible as a thunderbolt, and snatched me upwards far as the fire.
There it seemed that it and I burned, and the imagined fire so scorched that of necessity the sleep was broken.
Not otherwise Achilles shook himself,—turning around his awakened eyes, and not knowing where he was,
when his mother from Chiron to Scyros stole him away, sleeping in her arms, thither whence afterwards the Greeks withdrew him,—
than I started, as from my face sleep fled away; and I became pale, even as a man frightened turns to ice.
At my side was my Comforter only, and the sun was now more than two hours high, and my face was turned toward the sea.
“Have no fear,” said my Lord; “be reassured, for we are at a good point; restrain not, but increase all thy force.
Thou art now arrived at Purgatory; see there the cliff that closes it around; see the entrance, there where it appears divided.
A while ago in the dawn that precedes the day, when thy soul was sleeping within thee, upon the flowers wherewith the place down yonder is adorned,
came a lady, and said, “I am Lucia; let me take this one who is sleeping; thus will I assist him along his way.’
Sordello remained, and the other gentle forms: she took thee, and when the day was bright, she came upward, and I along her footprints.
Here she laid thee down: and first her beautiful eyes showed me that open entrance; then she and slumber went away together.”
Like a man that in perplexity is reassured, and that alters his fear to confidence after the truth is disclosed to him,
did I change; and when my Leader saw me without solicitude, up along the cliff he moved on, and I behind, toward the height.
Reader, thou seest well how I exalt my theme, and therefore marvel not if with more art I reenforce it.
The entrance within the gate of Purgatory is the assurance of justification, which is the change of the soul from a state of sin to a state of justice or righteousness. Justification itself consists, according to St. Thomas Aquinas (Summa Theologica, Prima Secundae, quaest. cxiii. art. 6 and 8), of four parts: first, the infusion of grace; second, the turning of the free will to God through faith; third, the turning of the free will against sin; fourth, the remission of sin. It must be accompanied by the sacrament of penance, which consists of contrition, confession, and satisfaction by works of righteousness.
Outside the gate of Purgatory justification cannot be complete. The souls in the Ante-Purgatory typify those who have entered on the way towards justification, but have not yet attained it. They undergo a period of mortification to sin, of deliberation, as St. Thomas Aquinas says: “Contingit autem quandoque quod praecedit aliqua deliberatio quae non est do substantia justificationis sed via in justificationem.” Summa Theol., l. c. art. 7.
We drew near to it, and reached such place that there, where at first there seemed to me a rift, like a cleft which divides a wall, I saw a gate, and three steps beneath for going to it of divers colors,
and a gatekeeper who as yet said not a word. And as I opened my eye there more and more, I saw him sitting on the upper step,
such in his face that I endured it not. And he had in his hand a naked sword, which so reflected the rays toward us
that I often raised my sight in vain. “Tell it from there, what would ye?” began he to say; “where is the guide?”
“Beware lest the coming up be harmful to you.” “A lady from Heaven with these things acquainted,” replied my Master to him, “only just now
said to us, ‘Go thither, here is the gate.’” “And may she speed your progress in good,” began again the courteous gatekeeper,
“come forward then unto our steps.”
Thither we came to the first great stair; it was of white marble so polished and smooth that I mirrored myself in it as I appear.
The second, of deeper hue than perse, was of a rough and scorched stone, cracked lengthwise and athwart.
The third, which above lies massy, seemed to me of porphyry as flaming red as blood that spirts forth from a vein.
Upon this the Angel of God held both his feet, seated upon the threshold that seemed to me stone of adamant.
Up over the three steps my Leader drew me with good will, saying, “Beg humbly that he undo the lock.”
Devoutly I threw myself at the holy feet; I besought for mercy’s sake that he would open for me; but first upon my breast I struck three times.
Seven P’s upon my forehead he inscribed with the point of his sword, and “See that thou wash these wounds when thou art within,” he said.
Ashes or earth dug out dry would be of one color with his vestment, and from beneath that he drew two keys.
One was of gold and the other was of silver; first with the white and then with the yellow he so did to the door, that I was content.
“Whenever one of these keys fails, and turns not rightly in the lock,” said he to us, “this passage doth not open.
More precious is one but the other requires much art and wit before it unlocks, because it is the one that disentangles the knot.
From Peter I hold them; and he told me to err rather in opening than in keeping shut, if but the people prostrate themselves at my feet.”
Then he pushed the valve of the sacred gate, saying, “Enter, but I give you warning that whoso looks behind returns outside.”
And when the pivots of that sacred portal, which are of metal, sonorous and strong, were turned within their hinges,
Tarpeia roared not so loud nor showed herself so harsh, when the good Metellus was taken from her, whereby she afterwards remained lean.
I turned away attentive to the first tone, and it seemed to me I heard “Te Deum laudamus” in voices mingled with sweet sound.
That which I heard gave me just such an impression as we are wont to receive when people stand singing with an organ,
and the words now are, now are not caught.
