O our Father who art in Heaven,
not circumscribed, but through the greater love
which to the first effects on high Thou hast,
praised be Thy name and Thy power
by every creature, even as it is befitting
to render thanks to Thy sweet effluence.
May the peace of Thy Kingdom come towards us,
for we to it cannot of ourselves,
if it come not, with all our striving.
As of their will Thine angels
make sacrifice to Thee, singing Hosanna,
so may men make of theirs.
Give us this day the daily manna,
without which through this rough desert
he backward goes, who toils most to go on.
And as we pardon every one for the wrong that we have suffered,
even do Thou pardon
benignant, and regard not our desert.
Our virtue which is easily overcome
put not to proof with the old adversary,
but deliver from him who so spurs it.
This last prayer, dear Lord,
truly is not made for ourselves, for it is not needful,
but for those who behind us have remained.
Thus praying for themselves and us good speed,
those souls were going under the weight,
like that of which one sometimes dreams,
unequally in anguish, all of them round and round,
and weary, along the first cornice,
purging away the mists of the world.
If they always ask good for us there,
what can be said and done here for them
by those who have a good root for their will?
Truly we ought to aid them to wash away the marks
which they bore hence, so that pure and light
they may go forth unto the starry wheels.
Ah! so may justice and pity unburden you
speedily that ye may be able to move the wing,
which according to your desire may lift you,
show on which hand towards the stair;
is the shortest way; and if there is more than one pass,
point out to us that which least steeply slopes;
for this man who comes with me, because of the load
of the flesh of Adam wherewith he is clothed,
is chary against his will of mounting up.”
the words which they returned to these
that he whom I was following had spoken,
It was not manifest from whom came
but it was said, “To the right hand along the bank
come ye with us, and ye will find the pass
possible for a living person to ascend.
And if I were not hindered by the stone
which tames my proud neck,
wherefore I needs must carry my face low,
that one who is still alive and is not named,
I would look at, to see if I know him,
and to make him pitiful of this burden.
I was Italian, and born of a great Tuscan;
Guglielmo Aldobrandesco was my father:
I know not if his name was ever with you.
The ancient blood and the gallant deeds
of my ancestors made me so arrogant
that, not thinking on the common mother,
I held every man in scorn to such extreme
that I died therefor, as the Sienese know,
and every child in Campagnatico knows it.
I am Omberto: and not only unto me doth harm
Pride, for all my kinsfolk
bath she dragged with her into calamity;
and here must I heap this weight
on her account till God be satisfied,—
here among the dead, since I did it not among the living.”
Listening, I bent down my face;
and one of them, not he who was speaking,
twisted himself under the weight that hampers him;
and he saw me, and recognized me and called out,
keeping his eyes with effort fixed
on me, who was going along all stooping with him.
“Oh,” said I to him, “art thou not Oderisi,
the honor of Gubbio, and the honor of that art
which in Paris is called illumination?”
“Brother,” said he, “more smiling are the leaves
that Franco of Bologna pencils;
the honor is now all his, and mine in part.
Truly I should not have been so courteous
while I lived, because of the great desire
of excelling whereon my heart was intent.
Of such pride here is paid the fee;
and yet I should not be here, were it not that,
still having power to sin, I turned me unto God.
Oh vainglory of human powers!
how little lasts the green upon the top,
if it be not followed by dull ages.
Cimabue thought to hold the field in painting,
and now Giotto has the cry,
so that the fame of him is obscured.
In like manner one Guido hath taken from the other
the glory of the language; and he perhaps is born
who shall drive both one and the other from the nest.
Worldly renown is naught but a breath
of wind, which now comes hence and now comes thence,
and changes name because it changes quarter.
What more fame shalt thou have, if thou strippest old
flesh from thee, than if thou hadst died
ere thou hadst left the pap and the chink,
before a thousand years have passed?—which is a shorter
space compared to the eternal than a movement of the eyelids
to the circle that is slowest turned in Heaven.
With him who takes so little of the road
in front of me, all Tuscany resounded,
and now he scarce is lisped of in Siena,
where he was lord when was destroyed,
the Florentine rage, which was proud
at that time, as now it is prostitute.
Your reputation is color of grass
that comes and goes, and he discolors it
through whom it came up fresh from the earth.”
And I to him, “Thy true speech brings
good humility to my heart, and thou allayest a great swelling in me;
but who is he of whom thou now wast speaking?”
“He is,” he answered, “Provinzan Salvani;
and he is here, because he was presumptuous
in bringing all Siena to his hands.
He has gone thus—and he goes without repose—
ever since he died: such money doth he pay
in satisfaction, who is on earth too daring.”
And I, “If that spirit who awaits
the verge of life ere he repents
abides there below, and unless good prayer further him ascends not hither,
us
ere as much time pass he lived,
how has this coining been granted unto him?”
“When he was living most renowned,” said he,
of his own accord in the Campo of Siena,
“laying aside all shame, he planted himself
and there, to draw his friend from the punishment
he was enduring in the prison of Charles,
brought himself to tremble in every vein.
More I will not say, and I know that I speak darkly;
but little time will pass, before thy neighbors
will so act that thou wilt he able to gloss it.
This deed released him from those limits.”
