Side by side, like oxen who go yoked,
I went on with that burdened spirit
so long as the sweet Pedagogue allowed it;
but when he said, “Leave him, and come on,
for here it is well that, both with sail and oars,
each as much as he can should urge his bark,”
I straitened up again, as is required for walking,
my body, although my thoughts
remained both bowed down and abated.
I was moving on, and following willingly
the steps of my Master, and both
now were showing how light we were,
when he said to me, “Turn thine eyes downward;
it will be well for thee, in order to solace the way,
to look upon the bed of thy footprints.”
As, so that there may be memory of them,
above the buried, their tombs in earth
bear inscribed that which they were before,—
whence oftentimes is weeping for them there,
through the pricking of remembrance,
which only to the pious gives the spur,—
so saw I there, but of better semblance
in respect of skill, figured
all that for pathway juts out from the mountain.
I saw him who was created noble
more than any other creature, down from heaven
with lightning flash descending, at one side.
I saw Briareus transfixed by the celestial bolt,
lying at the other side,
heavy upon the earth in mortal chill.
I saw Thymbraeus, I saw Pallas and Mars,
still armed, around their father,
gazing at the scattered limbs of the giants.
I saw Nimrod at the foot of his great toil,
as if bewildered, and gazing at the people
who in Shinar had with him been proud.
O Niobe! with what grieving eyes
did I see thee portrayed upon the road
between thy seven and seven children slain!
O Saul! how on thine own sword
here didst thou appear dead on Gilboa,
that after felt not rain or dew!
O mad Arachne, so I saw thee
already half spider, wretched on the shreds
of the work that to thy harm by thee was made!
O Rehoboam! here thine image seems not now to threaten,
but full of fear,
a chariot bears it away before any one pursues it.
The hard pavement showed also
how Alcmaeon made costly to his mother
the ill-fated ornament seem
It showed how his sons threw themselves
upon Sennacherib within the temple,
and how they left him there dead.
It showed the ruin and the cruel slaughter
that Tomyris wrought, when she said to Cyrus,
“For blood thou hast thirsted, and with blood I fill thee.”
It showed how the Assyrians fled in rout
after Holofernes was killed,
and also the remainder of the punishment.
I saw Troy in ashes, and in caverns.
O Ilion! how cast down and abject
the image which is there discerned showed thee!
What master has there been of pencil or of style
that could draw the shadows and the lines which there
would make every subtile genius wonder?
Dead the dead, and the living seemed alive.
He who saw the truth saw not better than I
all that I trod on while I went bent down.—
Now be ye proud, and go with haughty look,
ye sons of Eve, and bend not down your face
so that ye may see your evil path!
More of the mountain had now been circled by us,
and of the sun’s course far more spent,
than my mind, not disengaged, was aware,
when he, who always in advance attent
was going on, began, “Lift up thy head;
there is no more time for going thus abstracted.
See there an Angel, who is hastening
to come toward us: see how returns
from the service of the day the sixth hand-maiden.
With reverence adorn thine acts and thy face
so that he may delight to direct us upward.
Think that this day never dawns again.”
I was well used to his admonition
ever to lose no time, so that on that
theme he could not speak to me obscurely.
To us came the beautiful creature,
clothed in white, and in his face such as
seems the tremulous morning star.
Its arms it opened, and then it opened its wings;
it said, “Come: here at hand are the steps,
and easily henceforth one ascends.
To this invitation very few come.
O human race, born to fly upward,
why before a little wind dost thou so fall?”
He led us to where the rock was cut;
here he struck his wings across my forehead,
then promised me secure progress.
As on the right hand, in going up the mountain,
where sits the church that dominates
her the well-guided city above Rubaconte,
the bold flight of the ascent is broken
by the stairs, which were made in an age
when the record and the stave were secure,
in like manner, the bank which falls is slackened;
here very steeply from the next round
but on this side and that the high rock grazes.
As we turned our persons thither,
voices sang “Beati pauperes spiritu”
in such wise that speech could not tell it.
Ah, how different are these passes
from those of Hell! for here through songs
one enters, and there below through fierce lamentings.
Now we were mounting up over the holy stairs,
and it seemed to me I was far more light
than I had seemed on the plain before.
Whereon I, “Master, say, what heavy thing
has been lifted from me, so that almost no
weariness is felt by me as I go on?”
He answered, “When the P’s that remain
still almost extinct on thy countenance
shall be, as one is, quite erased,
thy feet will be so conquered by good will
that not only they will not feel fatigue,
but it will be delight to them to be urged up.”
Then I did like those who are going
with something on their head, unknown by them
unless the signs of others make them suspect;
wherefore the hand assists to ascertain,
and seeks and finds, and performs that office
which cannot be accomplished by the sight;
and with the fingers of my right hand outspread,
I found only six those letters
which he of the keys had encised upon my temples:
looking at which my Leader smiled.
