We were at the top of the stairway, where the mountain, ascent of which frees one from ill, is the second time cut back.
There a cornice binds the hill round about, in like manner as the first, except that its arc bends more quickly.
No shadow is there, nor mark which is apparent so that the bank appears smooth and so the path, with the livid color of the stone.
“If to enquire one waits here for people,” said the Poet, “I fear that perhaps our choice will have too much delay.”
Then he set his eyes fixedly upon the sun, made of his right side the centre for his movement, and turned the left part of himself.
“O sweet light, with confidence in which I enter on the new road, do thou lead us on it,” he said, “as there is need for leading here within.
Thou warmest the world, thou shinest upon it; if other reason prompt not to the contrary, thy rays ought ever to be guides.”
As far as here on earth is counted for a mile, so far had we now gone there, in little time because of ready will;
and towards us were heard to fly, not however seen, spirits uttering courteous invitations to the table of love.
The first voice that passed flying, “Virum non habent,” loudly said, and went on behind us reiterating it.
And before it had become quite inaudible through distance, another passed by, crying, “I am Orestes,” and also did not stay.
“O Father,” said I, “what voices are these?” and even as I was asking, lo! the third, saying, “Love them from whom ye have had wrong.”
And the good Master: “This circle scourges the sin of envy, and therefore from love are drawn the cords of the scourge.
The curb must be of the opposite sound; I think that thou wilt hear it before thou arrivest at the pass of pardon.
But fix thine eyes very fixedly through the air, and thou wilt see in front of us people sitting, and each is seated against the rock.”
Then more than before I opened my eyes; I looked in front of me, and saw shades with cloaks in color not different from the stone.
And when we were a little further forward, I heard them crying, “Mary, pray for us!” crying, “Michael,” and “Peter,” and all the Saints.
I do not believe there goes on earth to-day a man so hard that he had not been pricked by compassion at that which I then saw.
For when I had approached so near to them that their actions came surely to me, tears were drawn from my eyes by heavy grief.
They seemed to me covered with coarse haircloth, and one supported the other with his shoulders, and all were supported by the bank.
Thus the blind, who lack subsistence, stand at pardons to beg for what they need, and one bows his head upon another,
so that pity may quickly be moved in others, not only by the sound of the words, but by the sight which implores no less.
And as to the blind the sun profits not, so to the shades, there where I was now speaking, the light of Heaven wills not to make largess of itself;
for a wire of iron pierces and sews up the eyelids of all; even as is done to a wild sparrow-hawk, because it stays not quiet.
It seemed to me I was doing outrage as I went on, seeing others, not myself being seen, wherefore I turned me to my sage Counsel;
well did he know what the dumb wished to say, and therefore waited not my asking, but said, “Speak, and be brief and to the point.”
Virgil was coming with me on that side of the cornice from which one may fall, because it is encircled by no rim.
On the other side of me were the devout shades, that through the horrible stitches were pressing out the tears so that they bathed their cheeks.
I turned me to them, and, “O folk secure,” I began, “of seeing the lofty light which alone your desire holds in its care,
may grace speedily dissolve the scum of your consciences so that the stream of memory through them may descend clear,
tell me, for it will be gracious and dear to me, if there be a soul here among you that is Latin, and perhaps it will be good for him if I learn it.”
“O my brother, each is a citizen of one true city, but thou meanest, who lived in Italy while a pilgrim.”
This it seemed to me to hear for answer somewhat further on than where I was standing; wherefore I made myself heard still more that way.
Among the others I saw a shade that was expectant in look; and, if any one should wish to ask, How?—like a blind man it was lifting up its chin.
“Spirit,” said I, “that humblest thyself in order to ascend, if thou art that one which answered me, make thyself known to me either by place or by name.”
“I was a Sienese,” it answered, “and with these others I cleanse here my guilty life, weeping to Him that He grant Himself to us.
Sapient I was not, although I was called Sapia, and I was far more glad of others’ harm than of my own good fortune.
And that thou mayst not believe that I deceive thee, bear if I was foolish as I tell thee.
The arch of my years already descending, my fellow-citizens were joined in battle near to Colle with their adversaries, and I prayed God for that which He willed.
They were routed there, and turned into the bitter passes of flight; and I, seeing the pursuit, experienced a joy unmatched by any other;
so much that I turned upward my audacious face, crying out to God, ‘Now no more I fear thee;’ as the blackbird doth because of a little fair weather.
At the very end of my life I desired peace with God; and even yet my debt would not be lessened by penitence,
had it not been that Pier Pettinagno, who out of charity was sorry for me, held me in memory in his holy prayers.
But thou, who art thou that goest asking of our conditions, and bearest thine eyes loose as I think, and breathing dost speak?”
“My eyes,” said I, “will yet be taken from me here but a little time, for small is the offence committed through their being turned with envy.
Far greater is the fear, with which my soul is in suspense, of the torment beneath, and already the load down there weighs upon me.
And she to me, “Who then hath led thee here up among us, if thou thinkest to return below?” And I, “This one who is with me, and says not a word:
and I am alive; and therefore ask of me, spirit elect, if thou wouldst that I should yet move for thee on earth my mortal feet.”
“Oh, this is so strange a thing to hear,” she replied, “that it is great sign that God loves thee; therefore assist me sometimes with thy prayer.
And I beseech thee, by that which thou most desirest, if ever thou tread the earth of Tuscany, that with my kindred thou restore my fame.
Thou wilt see them among that vain people which hopes in Talamone, and will waste more hope there, than in finding the Diana
but the admirals will stake the most there.
