Who is this that circles our mountain
ere death have given him flight,
and opens and shuts his eyes at his own will?
I know not who he is, but I know that he is not alone.
Do thou, who art nearer to him, ask him;
and sweetly, so that he may speak, accost him.
Thus two spirits, leaning one to the other,
discoursed of me there on the right hand,
then turned up their faces to speak to me.
And one of them said, “O soul that fixed
still in thy body goest on toward heaven,
for charity console us, and tell us
whence thou comest, and who thou art; for thou makest us
so marvel at this thy grace,
as needs must a thing that never was before.”
And I, “Through mid Tuscany there wanders
a little stream, that has its rise on Falterona,
and a hundred miles of coarse does not suffice it.
From thereupon I bring this body.
To tell you who I am would be to speak in vain,
for my name as yet makes no great sound.”
If I grasp aright thy meaning
with my understanding,” then replied to me
he who had spoken first, “thou speakest of the Arno.”
And the other said to him, “Why did he conceal
the name of that river,
even as one does of horrible things?”
And the shade of whom this was asked,
delivered itself thus, “I know not, but truly
it is fit that the name of such a valley perish,
for from its source (where is so teeming
the rugged mountain chain, from which Pelorus is cut off,
that in few places it passes beyond that mark),
far as there where it gives back in restoration
that which heaven dries up of the sea
(wherefrom the rivers have what flows in them),
virtue is driven away as an enemy
by all men, like a snake, either through misfortune
of the place, or through evil habit that incites them.
Wherefore have so changed their nature
the inhabitants of the wretched valley,
that it seems as though Circe had had them in her feeding.
Among foul hogs, more fit for acorns
than for other food made for human use,
it first directs its poor path.
Then, coming down, it finds curs
more snarling, than their power warrants,
and at them disdainfully it twists its muzzle.
It goes on falling, and the more it swells,
so much the more finds the dogs becoming wolves
the accursed and ill-fated ditch.
Descending then through many hollow gulfs,
it finds foxes so full of fraud,
that they fear not that wit may entrap them.
Nor will I leave to speak though another hear me:
and well it will be for this one if hereafter he mind him
of that which a true spirit discloses to me.
I see thy grandson, who becomes
hunter of those wolves upon the bank
of the fierce stream, and terrifies them all.
He sells their flesh, it being yet alive;
then he slays them, like an old wild beast;
many of life, himself of honor he deprives.
Bloody he comes forth from the dismal wood;
he leaves it such, that from now for a thousand years,
in its primal state it is not rewooded.”
As at the announcement of grievous ills,
the face of him who listens is disturbed,
from whatsoever side the danger may assail him,
so I saw the other soul, that was turned
to hear, become disturbed and sad,
when it had gathered to itself the words.
The speech of one and the look of the other
made me wishful to know their names,
and I made request for it, mixed with prayers.
Wherefore the spirit which first had spoken to me
began again, “Thou wishest that I abase myself
in doing that for thee which thou wilt not do for me;
but since God wills that shine through in thee,
such great grace of His, I will not be chary to thee;
therefore know that I am Guido del Duca.
My blood was so inflamed with envy,
that had I seen a man becoming joyful,
thou wouldst have seen me overspread with livid hue.
Of my sowing I reap this straw.
O human race, why dost thou set thy heart
there where is need of exclusion of companionship?
“This one is Rinier; this is the glory and the honor
of the house of Calboli, where no one
since has made himself heir of his worth.
And not his blood alone has become stripped
between the Po and the mountain, and the sea and the Reno,
of the good required for truth and for delight;
for within these limits the ground is so full
of poisonous stocks, that slowly
would they now die out through cultivation.
Where is the good Lizio, and Arrigo Manardi,
Pier Traversaro, and Guido di Carpigna?
O men of Romagna turned to bastards!
When in Bologna will a Fabbro take root again?
When in Faenza a Bernardin di Fosco,
the noble scion of a mean plant?
Marvel not, Tuscan, if I weep,
when I remember with Guido da Prata,
Ugolin d’ Azzo who lived with us,
Federico Tignoso and his company,
the house of Traversara, and the Anastagi,
(both the one race and the other is without heir),
the ladies and the cavaliers, the toils and the pleasures
for which love and courtesy inspired our will,
there where hearts have become so wicked.
O Brettinoro! why dost thou not flee away,
since thy family hath gone,
and many people, in order not to be guilty?
Well doth Bagnacaval, that gets no more sons;
and ill doth Castrocaro, and worse Conio
that takes most trouble to beget such counts.
Well will the Pagani do when their Demon
shall go from them; yet not so that a pure
report of them can ever remain.
O Ugolin de’ Fantolin! thy name is secure,
since one is no longer awaited
who, degenerating, can make it dark.
But go thy way, Tuscan, now; for now it pleases me
far more to weep than to speak,
so much hath our discourse wrung my mind.”
We knew that those dear souls
heard us go; therefore by silence
they made us confident of the road.
After we had become alone by going on,
seemed like lightning when it cleaves the air,
a voice that came counter to us, saying,
“Everyone that findeth me shall slay me,”
and fled like thunder which rolls away,
if suddenly the cloud is rent.
Soon as our hearing had a truce from it,
lo! now another with so great a crash
that it resembled thunderings in swift succession:
“I am Aglauros who became a stone.”
And then to draw me close to the Poet,
I backward and not forward took a step.
Now was the air quiet on every side,
and he said to me, “That was the hard curb
which ought to hold man within his bound;
but ye take the bait, so that the hook
of the old adversary draws you to him,
and therefore little avails bridle or lure.
Heaven calls you, and around you circles,
displaying to you its eternal beauties,
and your eye looks only on the ground;
wherefore He who discerns everything scourges you.
