Recall to mind, reader, if ever on the alps
a cloud closed round thee, through which thou couldst
not see otherwise than the mole through its skin,
how, when the humid and dense vapors
begin to dissipate, the ball
of the sun enters feebly through them:
and thy imagination will easily
come to see, how I saw again
the sun at first, which was already at its setting.
So, matching mine to the trusty steps
of my Master, I issued forth from such a cloud
to rays already dead on the low shores.
O power imaginative, that dost sometimes so steal us
from outward things that a man heeds it not,
although around him a thousand trumpets sound,
who moveth thee if the sense afford thee naught?
A light, that in the heavens is formed,
moveth thee by itself, or by a will that downward guides it?
of the impiety of her who changed her form
into the bird that most delights in singing
In my imagination appeared the impress
And here was my mind so shut up
within itself that from without came nothing
which then might he received by it.
Then rained down within my high fantasy,
one crucified, scornful and fierce
in his look, and thus was dying.
Around him were the great Ahasuerus,
Esther his wife, and the just Mordecai,
who was in speech and action so blameless.
And when this imagination burst
of itself, like a bubble
for which the water fails, beneath which it was made,
there rose in my vision a maiden,
weeping bitterly, and she was saying, “O queen,
wherefore through anger hast thou willed to be naught?
Thou hast killed thyself in order not to lose Lavinia:
now thou hast lost me: I am she who mourns,
mother, at thine, before another’s ruin.
As sleep is broken, when of a sudden
the new light strikes the closed eyes,
and, broken, quivers ere it wholly dies,
so my imagining fell down,
soon as a light struck my face,
greater by far than that to which we are accustomed,
I turned me to see where I was,
when a voice said, “Here is the ascent;”
which from every other object of attention removed me,
and made my will so eager
to behold who it was that was speaking
that it never rests till it is face to face.
But, as before the sun which weighs down our sight,
and by excess veils its own shape,
so here my power failed.
“This is a divine spirit who
directs us, without our asking, on the way to go up,
and with his own light conceals himself.
He does for us as a man doth for himself;
for he who sees the need and waits for asking,
malignly sets himself already to denial.
Now let us grant our feet to such an invitation;
let us hasten to ascend ere it grows dark,
for after, it would not be possible until the day returns.”
Thus said my Guide; and I and he
turned our steps
to a stairway.
And soon as I was on the first step, near use I felt a motion as of wings,
and a fanning on my face, and I heard said, “Beati
pacifici,’ who are without ill anger.”
Now were so lifted above us
the last sunbeams on which the night follows,
that the stars were appearing on many sides.
“O my virtue, why dost thou so melt away?”
to myself I said, for I felt
the power of my legs put in truce.
We had come where the stair no farther ascends,
and we were stayed fast
even as a ship that arrives at the shore.
And I listened a little, if I might hear
anything in the new circle.
Then I turned to my Master, and said,
My sweet Father, say what offence
is purged here in the circle where we are:
if the feet are stopped, let not thy discourse stop.
And he to me, “The love of good, less
than it should have been, is here restored;
here is plied again the ill-slackened oar.
But that thou mayst still more clearly understand,
turn thy mind to me, and thou shalt gather
some good fruit from our delay.
“Neither Creator nor creature ever,”
began he, “son, was without love,
either natural, or of the mind, and this thou knowest.
The natural is always without error;
but the other may err either through an evil object,
or through too much or through too little vigor.
While love is directed on the primal goods,
and on the second moderates itself,
it cannot be the cause of ill delight.
But when it is bent to evil, or with more zeal,
or with less, than it ought, runs to good,
against the Creator works his own creature.
Hence thou canst comprehend that love needs must be
the seed in you of every virtue,
and of every action that deserves punishment.
Now since love can never
bend its sight from the welfare of its subject,
all things are safe from hatred of themselves;
and since no being can be conceived of divided
from the First, and standing by itself,
from hating Him every affection is cut off.
It follows, if, distinguishing, I rightly judge,
that the evil which is loved is that of one s neighbor; and
in three modes is this love born within your clay.
There is he who through the abasement of his neighbor,
hopes to excel, and only longs
that from his greatness he may be brought low.
There is he who fears loss of power, favor, honor, fame
because another rises;
whereat he is so saddened that he loves the opposite.
And there is he who seems so outraged by injury
that it makes him gluttonous of vengeance,
and such a one must needs coin evil for others.
This triform love
is lamented
down below.
Now I would that thou hear of the other,—that which runs to the good in faulty measure. Every one confusedly apprehends a good
in which the mind may be at rest, and which it desires;
wherefore every one strives to attain it.
If the love be slack that draws you to see this,
or to acquire it, this cornice,
after just repentance, torments you therefor.
Another good there is, which doth not make man happy,
is not happiness, is not the good
essence, the root of every good fruit.
The love which abandons itself too much to this
is lamented above us in three circles,
but how it is reckoned tripartite,
I am silent, in order that thou seek it for thyself.”
