had put an end to his discourse,
The lofty Teacher and looked attentive
on my face to see if I appeared content;
and I, whom a fresh thirst already was goading,
was silent outwardly, and within was saying, “Perhaps
the too much questioning I make annoys him.”
But that true Father, who perceived
the timid wish which did not disclose itself,
by speaking gave me hardihood to speak.
Then I, “My sight is vivified
so in thy light that I discern clearly
all that thy discourse may imply or declare:
therefore I pray thee, sweet Father dear,
that thou demonstrate to me the love
to which thou referrest every good action and its contrary.”
“Direct,” he said, “toward me the keen eyes
of the understanding, and will be manifest to thee.
the error of the blind who make themselves leaders
The mind, which is created apt to love,
is mobile unto everything that pleases,
soon as by pleasure it is roused to action.
Your faculty of apprehension from a real existence
draws an image, and within you displays it,
so that it makes the mind turn to it;
and if, thus turned, the mind incline toward it,
that inclination is love, that inclination is nature
which is bound anew in you by pleasure.
Then, as the fire moveth upward
by its own form, which is born to ascend
thither where it lasts longest in its material,
so the captive mind enters into longing,
which is a spiritual motion, and never rests
until the thing beloved makes it rejoice.
Now it may be apparent to thee, how far
the truth is hidden from the people who aver that
every love is in itself a laudable thing;
because perchance its matter appears
always to be good; but not every seal
is good although the wax be good.”
“Thy words, and my understanding which follows,”
replied I to him, “have revealed love to me;
but that has made me more full of doubt.
For if love is offered to us from without,
and if with other foot the soul go not,
if strait or crooked she go is not her own merit.”
And he to me, “So much as reason seeth here
can I tell thee; beyond that await
still for Beatrice; for it is a work of faith.
Every substantial form that is separate
from matter, and is united with it,
has a specific virtue residing in itself
which without action is not perceived,
nor shows itself save by its effect,
as by green leaves the life in a plant.
Yet, whence the intelligence
of the first cognitions comes man doth not know,
nor whence the affection for the first objects of desire,
which exist in you even as zeal in the bee
for making honey: and this first will
admits not desert of praise or blame
Now in order that to this every other may be gathered,
the virtue that counsels is innate in you,
and ought to keep the threshold of assent.
This is the principle wherefrom is derived
the reason of desert in you, according
as it gathers in and winnows good and evil loves.
Those who in reasoning went to the foundation
took note of this innate liberty
wherefore they bequeathed morals to the world.
Assuming then that of necessity,
every love which is kindled within you arises
the power exists in you to restrain it.
This noble virtue Beatrice calls
the free will, and therefore see
that thou have it in mind, if she take to speaking of it with thee.”
The moon, belated almost to midnight,
was making the stars appear fewer to us,
shaped like a bucket that is all ablaze,
and was running counter to the heavens along those paths
which the sun inflames, when the man of Rome
sees it between Sardinia and Corsica at its setting;
and that gentle shade, for whom
Pietola is more famed than the Mantuan city,
had laid down the burden of my loading:
wherefore I, who had harvested his open and plain discourse
upon my questions,
was standing like a man who, drowsy, rambles.
But this drowsiness was taken from me
suddenly by folk, who,
behind our backs, had now come round to us.
And such as Ismenus and Asopus of old saw
at night along their banks, was the rage and throng, which
in case the Thebans were in need of Bacchus,
curve their steps along that circle.
so, according to what I saw of them as they came,
those who by good will and right love are ridden
Soon they were upon us; because, running,
all that great crowd was moving on;
and two in front, weeping, were crying out,
Mary ran with haste unto the mountain
and Caesar, to subdue Ilerda,
thrust at Marseilles, and then ran on to Spain.
“Swift, swift, that time be not lost
by little love,” cried the others following,
“for zeal in doing well may refreshen grace.”
O people, in whom keen fervor now
perhaps redeems your negligence and delay,
through lukewarmness, in well-doing,
this one who is alive (and surely I lie not to you)
wishes to go up, soon as the sun may shine again for us;
therefore tell us where is the opening near.”
These words were of my Guide;
and one of those spirits said: “Come
thou behind us, and thou shalt find the gap.
We are so filled with desire to move on
that we cannot stay; therefore pardon,
if thou holdest our obligation for churlishness.
I was Abbot of San Zeno at Verona,
under the empire of the good Barbarossa,
of whom Milan, still grieving, doth discourse.
And he has one foot already in the grave,
who soon will lament on account of that monastery,
and will be sorry for having had power there;
because his son, ill in his whole body
and worse in mind, and who was evil-born.”
he has put in place of its true shepherd
I know not if more he said, or if he were silent,
so far beyond us he had already run by;
but this I heard, and to retain it pleased me.
And he who was at every need my succor
said: “Turn thee this way; see two of them
coming, giving a bite to sloth.”
In rear of all they were saying: “
The people for whom the sea was opened were dead
before their heirs beheld the Jordan;
and those who endured not the toil
even to the end with the son of Anchises,
offered themselves to life without glory.”
Then when those shades were so far parted from us
that they could no more be seen,
a new thought set itself within me,
from which many others and diverse were born;
and I so strayed from one unto another that,
thus wandering, I closed my eyes,
and transmuted my meditation into dream.
