At the hour when the diurnal heat,
can warm no more the coldness of the moon,—
vanquished by the Earth or sometimes by Saturn
when the geomancers their Greater Fortune
see in the east, before the dawn
rising along a path which short while stays dark for it,—
there came to me in dream a woman stammering,
with eyes asquint, and crooked on her feet,
with hands lopped off, and pallid in her color.
I gazed at her; and as the sun comforts
the cold limbs which the night bennmbs,
so my look made her tongue nimble,
and then set her wholly straight
in little while, and her wan face,
so colored as love requires.
Then, when she had her speech thus unloosed,
she began to sing, so that with difficulty
should I have turned my attention from her.
“I am,” she sang, “I am the sweet Siren, and
the mariners in mid sea I bewitch,
so full am I of pleasantness to hear.
I turned Ulysses from his wandering way
by my song; and whoso abides with me
seldom departs, so wholly I content him.”
Not yet was her mouth closed,
when a Lady appeared, holy, and ready
at my side to make her confused.
“O Virgil, Virgil, who is this?”
she sternly said; and he came
with his eyes fixed only on that modest one.
She took hold of the other, and in front she opened her,
rending her garments, and showed me her belly;
this waked me with the stench that issued from it.
I turned my eyes, and the good Virgil
said, “At least three calls have I given thee; arise and come;
let us find the opening through which thou mayst enter.”
Up I rose, and now were all
the circles of the sacred mountain full of the high day,
and we went on with the new sun at our backs.
Following him, I bore my forehead
like one who has it laden with thought,
and makes of himself the half arch of a bridge,
when I heard, “Come ye! here is the passage,”
spoken in a mode soft and benign,
such as is not heard in this mortal region.
With open wings, which seemed of a swan,
he who thus had spoken to us turned us upward
between the two walls of the hard rock.
He moved his feathers then, and fanned us,
affirming qui lugent to be blessed,
for they shall have their souls mistresses of consolation.
“What ails thee that ever on the ground thou lookest?”
my Guide began to say to me,
both of us having mounted up a little from the Angel.
“With such apprehension a recent vision makes me go,
which bends me to itself
so that I cannot from the thought withdraw me.”
“Hast thou seen,” said he, “that ancient sorceress
who above us henceforth is alone lamented?
Hast thou seen how from her man is unbound?
Let it suffice thee, and strike thy heels on the ground;
turn thine eyes to the lure that
the eternal King whirls with the great circles.”
Like the falcon that first looks down,
then turns at the cry, and stretches forward,
through desire of the food that draws him thither;
such I became, and such, so far as
the rock is cleft to afford a way to him who goeth up,
did I go on as far as where the circling is begun.
When I was come forth on the fifth round,
I saw people upon it who were weeping,
lying upon the earth all turned downward.
“Adhoesit pavimento anima mea,”
I heard them saying with such deep sighs
that the words were hardly understood.
O elect of God, whose sufferings
both justice and hope make less hard,
direct us toward the high ascents.
If ye come secure from the lying down,
and wish to find the speediest way,
let your right hands always be outside.
So prayed the Poet, and so was replied
a little in front to us by them;
wherefore I, in his speaking, marked the hidden one;
and then turned my eyes to my Lord,
whereon he granted me, with cheerful sign,
that which the look of my desire was asking for.
Then when I could do with myself according to my will,
I drew me above that creature
whose words had first made me note him,
saying, “Spirit in whom weeping matures
that without which no one can turn to God,
suspend a little for me thy greater care.
Tell me who thou wast; and why ye have your backs turned upward;
and if thou wishest that I obtain for thee
aught there whence I alive set forth.”
And he to me, “Thy our hinder parts
heaven turns to itself thou shalt know; but first,
scias quod ego fui successor Petri.
Between Sestri and Chiaveri descends
a beautiful stream, and of its name
the title of my race makes its top.
One month and little more I proved how
the great mantle weighs on him who guards it from the mire,
so that all other burdens seem a feather.
My conversion, ah me! was tardy;
but when I had become the Roman Shepherd,
then I found out the lying life.
I saw that there the heart was not at rest;
nor was it possible to mount higher in that life;
wherefore the love of this was kindled in me.
Up to that time a wretched soul and parted
from God had I been, avaricious of everything;
now, as thou seest, I am punished for it here.
That which avarice doth is displayed here
in the purgation of these converted souls,
and the Mountain has no more bitter penalty.
Even as our eye, was not lifted
on high, fixed upon earthly things,
so justice here to earth has depressed it.
As avarice quenched our love for every good,
in which labor is lost,
so justice here holds us close,
bound and captive in feet and hands;
and, so long as it shall be the pleasure of the just Lord,
so long shall we stay immovable and outstretched.”
I had knelt down and wished to speak;
but when I began, and he became aware,
only by listening, of my reverence,
“What cause,” said he, “hath bent thee thus downward?”
And I to him, “Because of your dignity
my conscience stung me for standing.”
“Straighten thy legs, and lift thee up, brother,”
he replied; “err not, fellow servant
of one power am I with thee and with the rest.
If ever thou hast understood that holy gospel sound
which says neque nubent,
thou mayst well see why I speak thus.
Now go thy way. I will not that thou longer stop;
for thy stay hinders my weeping,
with which I ripen that which thou hast said.
A grandchild I have on earth who is named Alagia,
good in herself, if only our house
make her not wicked by example;
and she alone remains to me yonder.”
