Against a better will the will fights ill:
wherefore against my own pleasure, in order to please him,
I drew from the water the sponge not full.
I moved on, and my Leader moved on through the
space vacant only alongside of the rock,
as upon a wall one goes close to the battlements.
For the people, that are pouring drop by drop
through their eyes the evil that possesses all the world,
on the other side approach too near the edge.
Accursed be thou, old she-wolf,
who more than all the other beasts hast prey,
because of thy hunger hollow without end!
O Heaven! by whose revolution it seems that men believe
conditions here below are transmuted,
when will he come through whom she shall depart?
We were going on with slow and scanty steps,
and I attentive to the shades whom I heard
piteously lamenting and bewailing;
and peradventure I heard “Sweet Mary,”
in front of us one crying out in his lament,
even as a woman does who is in travail;
and continuing, “So poor wast thou
as may be seen by that inn
where thou didst lay down thy holy burden.”
And following this I heard, “O good Fabricius,
thou didst rather wish for virtue with poverty than
to possess great riches with vice.”
These words were so pleasing to me
that I drew myself further on to have acquaintance
with that spirit from whom they seemed to come
He was speaking furthermore of the largess
which Nicholas made to the damsels
in order to conduct their youth to honor.
“O soul that discoursest so well,”
“tell me who thou wast,” said I, “and why thou alone
renewest these worthy praises.
Not without meed will be thy words,
if I return to complete the short journey
of that life which flies towards its end.”
And he, “I will tell thee, not for comfort
that I may expect from yonder, but because such
grace shineth on thee ere thou art dead.
I was the root of the evil plant
which overshadows all the Christian land
so that good fruit is rarely plucked therefrom.
But if Douai, Lille, Ghent, and Bruges
had power, soon would there be vengeance on it;
and I implore it from him who judges everything.
Yonder I was called Hugh Capet:
of me are born the Philips and the Louises,
by whom of late times France is ruled.
I was the son of a butcher of Paris.
When the ancient kings had died out
all, save one, who had assumed the grey garb,
I found me with the bridle fast in my hands,
of the government of the realm, and with so much power
recently acquired, and so full of friends,
that to the widowed crown was promoted
the head of my son, from whom
the consecrated bones of these began.
So long as the great dowry of Provence
took not the sense of shame from my race,
it was little worth, but still it did not ill.
Then it began with force and with falsehood;
its rapine; and, after, for amends,
Ponthieu and Normandy it took, and Gascony;
Charles came to Italy, and, for amends,
made a victim of Conradin, and then
thrust Thomas back to heaven for amends.
A time I see, not long after this day,
that draws forth another Charles from France
to make both himself and his the better known.
Without arms he goes forth thence alone, but with the lance
with which Judas jousted; and that he thrusts
so that he makes the paunch of Florence burst.
Therefrom not land, but sin and shame
he will gain for himself, so much the heavier,
as he the lighter reckons such harm.
The other, who has already gone out a prisoner from his ship,
I see selling his daughter, and bargaining over her,
as do the corsairs with other female slaves.
O Avarice, what more canst thou do with us,
since thou hast so drawn my race unto thyself
that it cares not for its own flesh?
In order that the ill to come and that already done may seem the less,
I see the fleur-de-lis entering Anagna,
and in his Vicar Christ made a captive.
I see him being mocked a second time;
I see the vinegar and the gall renewed,
and between living thieves him put to death.
I see the new Pilate so cruel
that this does not sate him, but, without decretal,
he bears his covetous sails into the Temple.
O my Lord, when shall I be glad
in seeing thy vengeance which, concealed,
makes sweet thine anger in thy secrecy?
“What I was saying of that only bride
of the Holy Spirit, and which made thee
turn toward me for some gloss,
is ordained for all our prayers
so long as the day lasts, but when the night comes,
we take up a contrary sound instead.
Then we rehearse Pygmalion,
whom a traitor and thief and parricide
his gluttonous longing for gold made;
and the wretchedness of the avaricious Midas
which followed on his greedy demand,
at which men must always laugh.
Then each one recalls of the foolish Achan,
how he stole the spoils, so that the anger
of Joshua seems still to sting him, here.
Then we accuse Sapphira with her husband;
we praise the kicks that Heliodorus received,
and in infamy circles the Whole mountain
Polymnestor who slew Polydorus.
Finally our cry here is, ‘Crassus,
tell us, for thou knowest, what is the taste of gold?’
At times one speaks loud, and another low,
according to the affection which spurs us to speak
now at a greater, now at a less pace.
Therefore in the good which by day is here discoursed of,
of late I was not alone, but here near by
no other person lifted up his voice.”
We had already parted from him,
and were striving to advance along the road
so far as was permitted to our power,
when I felt, like a thing that is falling,
the Mountain tremble; whereupon a chill seized me
such as is wont to seize him who goes to death.
Surely Delos shook not so violently,
before Latona made her nest therein
to give birth to the two eyes of heaven.
Then began on all sides such a cry
that the Master drew towards me,
saying: “Distrust not, while I guide thee.”
“Gloria in excelsis Deo,” all
were saying, according to what I gathered from those near at hand
whose cry it was possible to understand.
We stopped, motionless and in suspense,
like the shepherds who first heard that song,
until the trembling ceased, and it was ended.
Then we took up again our holy journey,
looking at the shades that were lying on the ground,
returned already to their wonted plaint.
No ignorance ever with so sharp attack
made me desirous of knowing—
if my memory err not in this—as it seemed to me I then experienced in thought.
Nor
for our haste, did I dare to ask,
nor of myself could I see aught there.
So I went on timid and thoughtful.
