The natural thirst, which is never satisfied save with the water whereof the poor woman of Samaria besought the grace,
was tormenting me, and haste was goading me along the encumbered way behind my Leader, and I was grieving at the just vengeance;
and lo,—as Luke writes for us that Christ, now risen forth from the sepulchral cave, appeared to the two who were on the way,—
a shade appeared to us; and it was coming behind us looking at the crowd that lay at its feet: nor did we perceive it, so it spoke first
saying, “My Brothers, may God give you peace!” We turned suddenly, and Virgil gave back to it the greeting which answers to that;
then he began: “In the assembly of the blest may the true court, which relegates me into eternal exile, place thee in peace.”
“How,” said it,—and meanwhile we went on steadily,—“if ye are shades that God deigns not on high, who hath guided you so far along his stairs?”
And my Teacher, “If thou regardest the marks which this one bears, and which the Angel traces, thou wilt clearly see it behoves that with the good he reign.
But, because she who spinneth day and night had not for him yet drawn the distaff off, which Clotho loads for each one and compacts,
his soul, which is thy sister and mine, coming upwards could not come alone, because it sees not after our fashion.
Wherefore I was drawn from out the ample throat of Hell to show him, and I shall show him so far on as my teaching can lead him.
But tell us, if thou knowest, why just now the mountain gave such shocks, and why all seemed to cry together, even down to its moist feet.”
Thus asking he shot for me through the needle’s eye of my desire, so that only with the hope my thirst became less craving.
The shade began: “There is nothing which without order the religion of the mountain can feel, or which can be outside its wont.
Free is this place from every alteration; of that which heaven receives from itself within itself there may be effect here, but of naught else;
because nor rain, nor hail, nor snow, nor dew, nor frost, falls higher up than the little stairway of the three short steps;
clouds appear not, or thick or thin; nor lightning, nor the daughter of Thaumas who yonder often changes her quarter;
dry vapor rises not farther up than the top of the three steps of which I spoke, where the vicar of Peter has his feet.
It trembles perhaps lower down little or much; but up here it never trembles because of wind that is hidden, I know not how, in the earth.
It trembles here when some soul feels itself pure, so that it rises or moves to ascend; and such a cry seconds it.
Of the purity the will alone makes proof, which surprises the soul, wholly free to change its company, and helps it with the will.
The soul wills at first indeed, but the inclination,—which, contrary to the will, Divine Justice sets to the torment, as erst to the sin,—allows it not.
And I who have lain in this pain five hundred years and more, only just now felt a free volition for a better seat.
Wherefore thou didst feel the earthquake, and hear the pious spirits through the Mountain giving praise to that Lord, who—may He speed them upward soon!”
Thus he said to us, and since one enjoys drinking in proportion as the thirst is great, I could not say how much he did me good.
And the sage Leader, “Now I see the net which snares you here, and how it is unmeshed; wherefore it trembles here; and for what ye rejoice together.
Now who thou wast may it please thee that I know, and that from thy words I learn why for so many centuries thou hast lain here?”
“At the time when the good Titus, with the aid of the Most High King, avenged the wounds wherefrom issued the blood sold by Judas,
I was fatuous enough on earth with the name which lasts longest, and honors most,” replied that spirit, “but not as yet with faith.
So sweet was my vocal spirit, that me of Toulouse Rome drew to itself, where I deserved to adorn my temples with myrtle.
Statius the people still on earth name me. I sang of Thebes, and then of the great Achilles, but I fell on the way with my second load.
Seed of my ardor were the sparks that warmed me of the divine flame whereby more than a thousand have been kindled;
I speak of the Aeneid, which was mother to me, and was my nurse in poesy: without it I balanced not the weight of a drachm;
and to have lived yonder, when Virgil lived, I would agree to one sun more than I owe for my issue from ban.”
These words turned Virgil to me with a look which, silent, said, “Be silent:” but the power that wills cannot do everything;
for smiles and tears are such followers on the emotion from which each springs, that in the most truthful they least follow the will.
I merely smiled, like a man who makes a sign; whereat the shade became silent, and looked at me in the eyes where the expression is most fixed.
And it said, “So mayst thou in good complete so great a labor, why aid thy face just now display to me a flash of a smile?”
Now am I caught on one side and the other: one bids me be silent, the other conjures me to speak; wherefore I sigh and am understood
by my Master, and “Have no fear to speak,” he said to me, “but speak, and tell him what he asks so earnestly.”
Whereon I, “Perhaps thou marvellest, ancient spirit, at the smile I gave; but I would have more wonder seize thee.
This one who guides my eyes on high is that Virgil from whom thou didst derive the strength to sing of men and of the gods.
If thou didst believe other cause for my smile, dismiss it as untrue, and believe it to be those words which thou saidst of him.”
Already he was stooping to embrace the feet of my Leader, but he said to him, “Brother, do it not, for thou art a shade, and thou seest a shade.”
And he rising, “Now canst thou comprehend the sum of the love that warms me to thee when I forget our vanity,
treating the shades as if a solid thing.”
