While my eyes upon the green leafage,
I was fixing, just as is wont to do,
he who wastes his life following the little bird
my more than Father said to me, “Son,
come on now, for the time that is assigned to us
must be parcelled out more usefully.”
I turned my face, and my step no less quickly
after the Sages, who were speaking so
that they made the going of no cost to me;
and ho! a lament and song were heard,
“Labia mea, Domine,” in such fashion
that it gave birth to delight and pain.
“O sweet Father, what is that which I hear?”
I began, and he, “Shades which go,
perhaps loosing the knot of their debt.”
Even as do pilgrims rapt in thought,
who, overtaking on the road unknown folk,
turn themselves to them, and stay not;
so behind us, moving more quickly,
coming up and passing by, gazed at us.
a crowd of souls, silent and devout.
Each was dark and hollow in the eyes,
pallid in the face, and so wasted
that the skin took its shape from the bones.
I do not think that so to utter rind
Erisichthon was dried up,
by hunger, when he had most fear of it.
I said to myself in thought, “Behold
the people who lost Jerusalem,
when Mary struck her beak into her son.”
The sockets of their eyes seemed rings without gems.
Whoso in the face of men reads OMO,
would surely there have recognized the M.
Who would believe that the scent of an apple,
could have such mastery, begetting longing,
and that of a water, if he knew not how?
I was now wondering what so famished them,
the cause not yet being manifest,
of their meagreness and of their wretched husk
and lo! from the depths of its head,
a shade turned his eyes on me, and looked fixedly,
then cried out loudly, “What grace to me is this!”
Never should I have recognized him by his face;
but in his voice that was disclosed to me
which his aspect in itself had suppressed.
This spark rekindled in me all my knowledge
of the altered visage,
and I recognized the face of Forese.
“Ah, strive not with the dry scab
that discolors my skin,” he prayed,
“nor with my lack of flesh,
but tell me the truth about thyself; and who are these
two souls, who yonder make an escort for thee:
stay not thou from speaking to me.”
“Thy face, which once I wept for dead,
now gives me for weeping no less a grief,”
replied I, “seeing it so disfigured;
therefore, tell me, for God’s sake, what so despoils you;
make me not speak while I am marvelling;
for ill can he speak who is full of another wish.”
And he to me, “From the eternal council
falls a power into the water and into the plant,
now left behind, whereby I become so thin.
All this folk who weeping sing,
because of following their appetite beyond measure,
here in hunger and in thirst make themselves holy again.
kindles in us desire to eat and drink.
The odour which issues from the apple and from the spray
that spreads over the verdure.
And not once only this floor
as we circle is our pain renewed;
I say pain, and ought to say solace,
for that will leads us to the tree
which led Christ gladly to say, ‘Eli,’
when with his blood he delivered us.”
And I to him, “Forese, from that day
on which thou didst change world to a better life,
up to this time five years have not rolled round.
If the power had ended in thee,
of sinning further, ere the hour supervened
of the good grief that to God reweds us,
how hast thou come up hither?
I thought to find thee still down there below,
where time is made good by time.”
And he to me, “has brought me thus quickly
to drink of the sweet wormwood of these torments.
My Nella with her bursting tears
With her devout prayers and with sighs
has she drawn me from the shore where one waits,
and has delivered me from the other circles.
So much the more dear and more beloved of God
is my little widow, whom I loved so much,
as she is the more solitary in good works;
for the Barbagia of Sardinia is far more
modest in its women
than the Barbagia where I left her.
O sweet brother, what wouldst thou that I say?
A future time is already in my sight,
to which this hour will not be very old,
in which from the pulpit it shall be forbidden
to the brazen-faced dames of Florence
to go displaying the bosom with the paps.
What Barbarian, what Saracen women were there ever
who required to make them go covered
either spiritual or other discipline?
But if the shameless ones were aware
of that which the swift heaven is preparing for them,
already would they have their mouths open for howling.
For if foresight here deceives me not,
they will be sad ere
he who is now consoled with the lullaby covers his cheeks with hair.
Ak brother, now no longer conceal thyself from me;
thou seest that not only I but all these people
are gazing there where thou dost veil the sun.”
Whereon I to him: “If thou bring back to mind
what thou wast with me, and what I was with thee,
the present remembrance will even now be grievous.
From that life he turned me
who goes before me the other day, when
the sister of him yonder,”
and I pointed to the sun, “showed herself round.
Through the deep night, from the truly dead, he has led me,
with this true flesh which follows him.
Thence his counsels have drawn me up,
ascending and circling the mountain
that sets you straight whom the world made crooked.
So long he says that he will bear me company
till I shall be there where Beatrice will be;
there it behoves that I remain without him.
Virgil is he who says thus to me,”
and I pointed to him, “and this other is that shade
for whom
just now your realm, which from itself releases him, shook every slope.”
