It was the hour in which the ascent allowed no delay;
for the meridian circle had been left by the Sun to the Bull,
and by the Night to the Scorpion;
wherefore as the man doth who, stops not,
but goes on his way, whatever may appear to him,
if the goad of necessity prick him,
so did we enter through the gap,
one before the other, taking the stairway
which by its narrowness unpairs the climbers.
And as the little stork that lifts its wing
through will to fly, and dares not
abandon the nest, and down it drops,
so was I, with will kindled and quenched
to ask, coming even to the motion
that he makes who proposes to speak.
Nor, though our going was swift, did
my sweet Father forbear, but he said, Discharge
the bow of speech which up to the iron thou hast drawn.”
Then I opened my mouth confidently,
and began, “How can one become thin,
where the need of nourishment is not felt?”
“If thou hadst called to mind how Meleager
was consumed by time consuming of a brand
this would not be,” he said, “ so difficult to thee;
and if thou hadst thought, how at your quivering
your image quivers within the mirror,
that which seems hard would seem easy to thee.
But that thou mayst to thy pleasure be inwardly at ease,
lo, here is Statius, and I call on him and pray
that he be now the healer of thy wounds.”
“If I explain to him the eternal view,”
replied Statius, “where thou art present,
let it excuse me that to thee I cannot snake denial.”
Then he began, “If my words,
son, thy mind regards and receives,
they will be. for thee a light unto the ‘how,’ which thou askest.
The perfect blood which is never drunk
by the thirsty veins, but remains
like the food which thou removest from time table,
takes in time heart virtue informative of all the human members;
even as that blood does,
which passes through the veins to become those members.
Digested yet again, it descends to the part whereof it is more becoming
to be silent than to speak; and thence, afterwards, it drops
upon another’s blood in the natural vessel.
There one and the other meet together;
the one ordained to be passive, and the other to be active
because of the perfect place wherefrom it is pressed out;
and, conjoined with the former, the latter begins to operate,
first by coagulating, and then by quickening
that to which it gives consistency for its own material.
The active virtue having become a soul,
like that of a plant (in so far different
that this is on the way, and that already arrived),
so worketh then, that now it moves and feels,
as a sea-fungus doth; and then it proceeds
to organize the powers of which it is the germ.
Now, son, the virtue is displayed, now it is diffused,
which issues from the heart of the begetter,
where nature is intent on all the members.
But how from an animal it becomes a speaking being,
thou as yet seest not; this is such a point
that once it made one wiser than thee to err,
so that in his teaching he separated
from the soul the potential intellect,
because he saw no organ assumed by it.
Open thy heart unto the truth that is coming,
and know that, so soon as in the foitus
the articulation of the brain is perfect,
the Primal Motor turns to it with joy
over such art of nature, and inspires
a new spirit replete with virtue,
which draws that which it finds active there
into its own substance, and makes one single soul
which lives and feels and circles on itself
And that thou mayst the less wonder at this doctrine,
consider the warmth of the sun which becomes wine,
combining with the juice that flows from the vine.
And when Lachesis has no more thread,
this soul is loosed from the flesh, and virtually
bears away with itself both the human and the divine;
the other faculties all of them mute, but
memory, understanding, and will
far more acute in action than before.
Without staying, it falls of itself,
marvelously to one of the banks.
Here it first knows its own roads.
Soon as the place there circumscribes it,
the formative virtue rays out around it
in like manner, and as much as in the living members.
And as the air when it is full of rain
by another’s rays which are reflected in it,
becomes adorned with divers colors
so here the neighboring air shapes itself
in that form which is imprinted upon it
virtually by the soul that hath stopped.
And then like the flamelet
which follows the fire wherever it shifts,
so its new form follows the spirit.
Since thereafter from this it has its aspect,
it is called a shade; and by this it shapes the organ
for every sense even to the sight;
by this we speak, and by this we laugh,
by this we make the tears and the sighs,
which on the mountain thou mayst have perceived.
According as the desires impress us
and the other affections the shade is shaped;
and this is the cause of that at which thou wonderest.”
And now we had come to the last circuit,
and turning to the right hand,
we were intent upon another care.
Here the bank shoots forth flame,
and the ledge breathes a blast upward
which drives it back, and sequesters a path from it.
Wherefore it was needful to go along the unenclosed side
one by one; and I was afraid of the fire,
on the one hand, and on the other I was afraid of falling off.
My Leader said, “Through this place,
one must keep tight the rein upon the eyes,
because for little one might go astray.”
“Summae Deus clementiae,” in the bosom
of the great burning then I heard singing,
which made me care not less to turn.
And I saw spirits going through the flame;
wherefore I looked at them and at my own steps,
apportioning to each my sight from moment to moment.
After the end of that hymn,
they loudly cried: “Virum non cognosco;”
then began again the hymn with low voice;
this finished, they cried anew, “To the wood
Diana kept herself, and drove therefrom Helice,
who had felt the poison of Venus.”
Then they turned to singing; then wives
they cried out, and husbands who were chaste,
as virtue and marriage enjoin upon us.
And I believe this mode suffices them
through all the time the fire burns them.
With such cure it is needful, and with such food,
that the last wound of all should be closed up.
