While thus along the edge, one before the other,
we were going on, and the good Master was often
saying, “Take heed! let it avail that I warn thee,”
the sun was striking me on the right shoulder,
and now, raying out, all the west
was changing from azure to a white aspect;
and with my shadow I was making
the flame appear more ruddy, and only at such an indication
I saw many shades, as they went on, give attention.
This was the occasion which gave
them a beginning to speak of me, and they began
to say, “He seems not a fictitious body;”
then toward me, so far as they could do so,
certain of them canine, always with regard
not to come out where they would not be burned.
“O thou! who goest, not from being slower,
but perhaps from reverence, behind the others,
reply to me who in thirst and fire am burning.
Nor to me only is thy reply of need,
for all these have a greater thirst for it
than Indian or Ethiop of cold water.
Tell us how it is that thou makest of thyself a wall
to the sun, as if thou hadst not yet
entered within the net of death.”
Thus spoke to me one of them; and I should
now have disclosed myself, if I had not been intent
on another new thing which then appeared;
for through the middle of the burning road
were coming people with their faces opposite to these,
who made me gaze in suspense.
There I see, on every side, all the shades making haste
and kissing each other,
without stopping, content with brief greeting.
Thus within their brown band
one ant touches muzzle with another,
perchance to enquire their way and their fortune.
Soon as they end the friendly salutation,
before the first step runs on beyond,
each strives to outcry the other;
the new-come folk: “Sodom and Gomorrah,”
and the other, “Into the cow enters Pasiphae,
that the bull may run to her lust.”
Then like cranes, of whom part should fly to the Riphaean mountains,
and part toward the sands,
these shunning the frost and those the sun,
one folk goes, the other comes on,
and weeping they return to their first chants,
and to the cry which most befits them.
And drew near to me as before,
those same who had prayed me,
intent in their looks to listen.
I, who twice had seen their desire,
began, “O souls secure
of having, whenever it may he, a state of peace,
neither unripe nor mature have
my limbs remained yonder, but they are here with me
with their blood, and with their joints.
I go up in order to be no longer blind.
A Lady is on high who winneth grace for us,
whereby I bring my mortal part through your world.
But so may your greater will
soon become satisfied, in such wise that the heaven may harbor you
which is full of love, and most amply spreads,
tell me, in order that I may yet rule the paper for it,
who are ye, and who are that crowd
which goes its way behind your backs.”
Not otherwise stupefied, the mountaineer is confused,
and gazing round is dumb,
when rough and savage he enters the town,
than each shade became in his appearance;
but, after they were unburdened of their bewilderment,
which in high hearts is quickly assuaged,
“Blessed thou, who of our regions”
began again that one who first had asked me,
“dost ship experience for dying better.
The people who do not come with us offended
in that for which once Caesar in his triumph
heard ‘Queen’ cried out against him;
therefore they go off shouting ‘Sodom,’
reproving themselves as thou hast heard,
and aid the burning by their shame.
Our sin was hermaphrodite;
but because we observed not human law,
following our appetite like beasts,
in opprobrium of ourselves, is uttered by us,
when we part from them, the name of her
who bestialized herself in the beast-shaped planks.
Now thou knowest our deeds, and of what we were guilty;
if, perchance, thou wishest to know by name who we are,
there is not time to tell, and I could not do it.
I will indeed make thee short of wish about myself;
I am Guido Guinicelli; and now I purify myself,
because I truly repented before my last hour.
Such as in the sorrow of Lycurgus
her two sons became at seeing again their mother,
such I became, but I rise not so far,
when I heard name himself the father
of me, and of my betters who ever
used sweet and gracious rhymes of love;
and without hearing or speaking, full of thought I went on,
gazing a long time upon him;
nor, for the fire, did I draw nearer to him.
After I was fed with looking,
I offered myself wholly ready for his service,
with the affirmation that makes another believe.
And he to me, “thou leavest such trace
By what I hear in me, and so bright,
that Lethe cannot take it away nor make it dim.
But if thy words have now sworn truth,
tell me what is time cause why
in speech and look thou showest that thou dost hold me dear?”
And I to him, “The sweet ditties of yours,
which, so long as the modern fashion shall endure,
will still make dear their ink.”
“O brother,” said he, “this one whom I distinguish
for thee with my finger,” and he pointed to a spirit in advance,
“was a better smith of the maternal speech.
In verses of love, and prose of romances,
he excelled all, and let the foolish talk
who think that he of Limoges surpasses him;
to rumor more than to truth they turn their faces,
and thus confirm their own opinion,
before art or reason is listened to by them.
Thus did many of old concerning Guittone,
from cry to cry only to him giving the prize,
until the truth has prevailed with more persons.
Now if thou hast such ample privilege,
that it he permitted thee to go unto the cloister
in which Christ is abbot of the college,
say for me to him one paternoster,
so far as needs for us in this world
where power to sin is no longer ours.”
Then, perhaps to give place to the other
who was near behind him, he disappeared through the fire,
even as through the water a fish going to the bottom.
I moved forward a little to him who had been pointed out to me,
and said,
that for his name my desire was making ready a gracious place.
He began graciously to say,
“So pleaseth me your courteous demand
that I cannot, and I will not, hide me from you.
I am Arnaut who weep and go singing;
contrite I see my past folly,
and joyful I see before me the day I hope for.
Now I pray you by that virtue
which guides you to the summit of the stair,
at times be mindful of my pain.”
Then he hid himself in the fire that refines them.
