As when he darts forth his first rays
there where his Maker shed His blood
(Ebro falling under the lofty Scales,
and the waves in the Ganges scorched by noon)
so the sun was now standing; so that the day was departing,
when the glad Angel of God appeared to us.
Outside the flame he was standing on the bank,
and was singing, “Beati mundo corde,”
in a voice far more living than ours:
then, “No one goes further, if first
ye holy souls, the fire sting not; enter into it,
and to the song beyond be ye not deaf,”
he said to us, when we were near him.
Whereat I became such, when I heard him,
as is he who in the pit is put.
With hands clasped upwards, I stretched forward,
looking at the fire, and imagining vividly
human bodies I had once seen burnt.
The good Escorts turned toward me,
and Virgil said to me, “My son,
here may be torment, but not death.
Bethink thee! bethink thee! and if I
even upon Geryon guided thee safe,
what shall I do now that I am nearer God?
Believe for certain that if within the belly
of this flame thou shouldst stand full a thousand years,
it could not make thee bald of one hair.
And if thou perchance believest that I deceive thee,
draw near to it, and make trial
for thyself with fine own hands on the hem of thy garments.
Put aside now, put aside every fear;
turn hitherward, and come on secure.”
And I still motionless and against conscience!
When he saw me still stand motionless and obdurate,
disturbed a little, he said, “Now see, son,
between Beatrice and thee is this wall.”
As at the name of Thisbe, opened his eyelids
Pyramus, at point of death, and looked at her,
what time the mulberry became vermilion,
so, my obduracy becoming softened,
I turned me to the wise Leader, hearing the name
that in my memory is ever welling up.
Whereat he nodded his head, amid said, “How!
do we want to stay on this side?” then he smiled
as one doth at a child who is conquered by an apple.
Then within the fire he set himself before me,
praying Statius, that he would come behind,
who previously, on the long road, had divided us.
When I was in, into boiling glass
I would have thrown myself to cool me,
so without measure was the burning there.
My sweet Father, to encourage me,
went talking ever of Beatrice,
saying, “I seem already to see her eyes.
A voice was guiding us, which was singing
on the other side, and we, ever attentive to it,
came forth there where was the ascent.
“Venite, benedicti patris mei,”
sounded within a light that was there
such that it overcame me, and I could not look on it.
“The sun departs,” it added, “and the evening comes;
tarry not, but hasten your steps
so long as the west grows not dark.”
The way mounted straight, through the rock,
in such direction that I cut off the rays
in front of me of the sun which was already low.
And of few stairs had we made essay ere,
the setting of the sun, by the vanishing of the shadow,
both I and my Sages perceived behind us.
And before in all its immense regions
the horizon had become of one aspect,
and night had all her dispensations,
each of us made of a stair his bed;
for the nature of the mountain took from us
the power more than the delight of ascending.
As goats become tranquil as they ruminate,
who have been swift and wayward
on the peaks ere they are fed,
silent in the shade while the sun is hot,
guarded by the herdsman, who on his staff
is leaning and, leaning, watches them;
and as the shepherd, who lodges out of doors,
passes the night beside his quiet flock,
watching that the wild beast may not scatter it:
such were we all three then,
I like a goat, and they hike shepherds,
hemmed in on this side and on that by the high rock.
Little of the outside could there appear,
but through that little I saw the stars
both brighter and larger than their wont.
Thus ruminating, and thus gazing upon them,
sleep overcame me, sleep which oft
before a deed be done knows news thereof.
At the hour, I think, when from the east
first beamed on the mountain Cytherea,
who with fire of love seems always burning,
young and beautiful in dream I seemed
to see a lady going through a meadow
gathering flowers, and singing she was saying,
“Let him know, whoso asks my name,
that I am Leah, and I go moving around
my fair hands to make myself a garland.
To please me at the glass here I adorn me,
but my sister Rachel never withdraws
from her mirror, and sits all day.
She is as fain to look with her fair eyes
as I to adorn me with my hands.
Her seeing, and me doing, satisfies.”
And now before the splendors which precede the dawn,
and rise the more grateful unto pilgrims
as in returning they lodge less remote,
the shadows fled away on every side,
and my sleep with them; whereupon I rose,
seeing my great Masters already risen.
That pleasant apple which through so many branches
the care of mortals goes seeking,
to-day shall put in peace thy hungerings.”
Virgil toward me words such as these
used, and never were there gifts
which could be equal in pleasure to these.
Such wish upon wish came to me
to be above, that at every step thereafter
I felt the feathers growing for my flight.
When all the stairway beneath us
had been run, and we were on the topmost step,
Virgil fixed his eyes on me,
and said, “The temporal fire and the eternal
thou hast seen, son, and art come to a place
where of myself no further onward I discern.
I have brought thee here with understanding and with art;
thine own pleasure now take thou for guide:
forth art thou from the steep ways, forth art thou from the narrow.
See there the sun, which on thy front doth shine;
see the young grass, the flowers, the shrubs,
which here the earth of itself alone produces.
Until rejoicing come the beautiful eyes
which weeping made me come to thee,
thou canst sit down and thou canst go among them.
Expect no more or word or sign from me.
Free, upright, and sane is thine own free will,
and it would be wrong not to act according to its pleasure;
wherefore thee over thyself I crown and mitre.”
