Fain now to search within and round about the divine forest dense and living, which tempered the new day to my eyes,
without longer waiting I left the bank, taking the level ground very slowly, over the soil that everywhere breathes fragrance.
A sweet breeze that had no variation in itself struck me on the brow, not with heavier blow than a soft wind;
at which the branches, readily trembling, all of them were bending to the quarter where the holy mountain casts its first shadow;
yet not so far parted from their straightness, that the little birds among the tops would leave the practice of their every art;
but with full joy singing they received the early breezes among the leaves, which kept a burden to their rhymes,
such as gathers from bough to bough through the pine forest upon the shore of Chiassi, when Aeolus lets forth Sirocco.
Now had my show steps carried me within the ancient wood so far that I could not see back to where I had entered it:
and lo, a stream took from me further progress, which toward the left with its little waves was bending the grass that sprang upon its bank.
All the waters, that are purest on the earth, would seem to have some mixture in them, compared with that which hides nothing,
although it moves along dusky under the perpetual shadow, which never lets the sun or moon shine there.
With feet I stayed, and with my eyes I passed to the other side of the streamlet, to gaze at the great variety of the fresh may;
and there appeared to me, even as a thing appears suddenly which turns aside through wonder every other thought,
a solitary lady, who was going along, singing, and culling flower from flower, wherewith all her path was painted.
“Ah, fair Lady, who warmest thyself in the rays of love, if I may trust to looks which are wont to be witnesses of the heart,
may the will come to thee,” said I to her, “to draw forward toward this stream, so far that I can understand what thou art singing.
Thou makest me remember where and what was Proserpine, at the time when her mother lost her, and she the spring.”
As a lady who is dancing turns with feet close to the ground and to each other, and hardly sets foot before foot,
she turned herself on the red and on the yellow flowerets toward me, not otherwise than a virgin who lowers her modest eyes,
and made my prayers content, approaching so that the sweet sound came to me with its meaning.
Soon as she was there where the grasses are now bathed by the waves of the fair stream, she bestowed on me the gift of lifting her eyes.
I do not believe that so great a light shone beneath the lids of Venus, transfixed by her son, beyond all his custom.
She was smiling upon the opposite right bank, gathering with her hands more colors which that high land brings forth without seed.
The stream made us three paces apart; but the Hellespont where Xerxes passed it—a curb still on all human pride—
endured not more hatred from Leander for swelling between Sestos and Abydos, than that from me because it opened not then.
“Ye are new come,” she began, “and, perchance, why I smile mu this place chosen for human nature as its nest,
some doubt holds you marvelling; but the psalm ‘Delectasti’ affords light which may uncloud your understanding.
And thou who art in front, and didst pray to me, say, if else thou wouldst hear, for I came ready for every question of thine, so far as may suffice.”
“The water,” said I, “and the sound of the forest, impugn within me recent faith in something that I heard contrary to this.”
Whereon she, “I will tell, how from its own cause proceeds that which makes thee wonder; and I will clear away the mist which strikes thee.
The supreme Good, which itself alone is pleasing to itself, made man good, and for good, and gave this place for earnest to him of eternal peace.
Through his own default he dwelt here little while; through his own default to tears and to toil he changed honest laughter and sweet play.
In order that the disturbance, which the exhalations of the water and of the earth (which follow so far as they can the heat) produce below,
might not make any war on man, this mountain rose so high toward heaven, and is free from them from the point where it is locked in.
Now because the whole air revolves in circuit with the primal revolution, if its circle be not broken by some projection,
upon this height, which is wholly disengaged in the living air, this motion strikes, and makes the wood, since it is dense, resound;
and the plant being struck hath such power that with its virtue it impregnates the breeze, and this then in its whirling scatters it around:
and the rest of the earth, according as it is fit in itself, or through its sky, conceives and brings forth divers trees of divers virtues.
It should not seem a marvel then on earth, this being heard, when some plant, without manifest seed, there takes hold.
And thou must know that the holy plain where thou art is full of every seed, and has fruit in it which yonder is not gathered.
The water which thou seest rises not from a vein restored by vapor which the frost condenses, like a stream that gains and loses breath,
but it issues from a fountain constant and sure, which by the will of God regains as much as, open on two sides, it pours forth.
On this side it descends with virtue that takes from one the memory of sin; on the other it restores that of every good deed.
Here Lethe, so on the other side Eunoe it is called; and it works not if first it be not tasted on this side and on that.
To all other savors this is superior.
“And, though thy thirst may be fully sated even if I disclose no more to thee, I will yet give thee a corollary for grace;
nor do I think my speech may be less dear to thee, if beyond promise it enlarge itself with thee. Those who in ancient time told in poesy
of the Age of Gold, and of its happy state, perchance upon Parnassus dreamed of this place: here was the root of mankind innocent;
here is always spring, and every fruit; this is the nectar of which each tells.”
I turned me back then wholly to my Poets, and saw that with a smile they had heard the last sentence;
then to the beautiful Lady I turned my face.
