Singing like a lady enamored, she, at the ending of her words, continued: “Beati, quorum tecta sunt peccata;”
and, like nymphs who were wont to go solitary through the sylvan shades, this one desiring to see and that to avoid the sun,
she moved on then counter to the stream, going up along the bank, and I at even pace with her, following her little step with little.
Of her steps and mine were not a hundred, when the banks both like gave a turn, in such wise that toward the east I faced again.
Nor thus had our way been long, when the lady wholly turned round to me, saying, “My brother, look and listen.”
And lo! a sudden lustre ran from all quarters through the great forest, so that it put me in suspect of lightning.
But because the lightning ceases even as it comes, and this, hasting, became more and more resplendent, in my thought I said, “What thing is this?”
And a sweet melody ran through the luminous air; whereupon a righteous zeal caused me to blame the temerity of Eve,
that, there, where time earth and the heavens were obedient, the woman only, and but just now formed, did not endure to stay under any veil;
under which if she had devoutly stayed I should have tasted those ineffable delights before, and for a longer time.
While I was going on and such first fruits of the eternal pleasure, all enrapt, and still desirous of more joys,
in front of us the air under the green branches became like a blazing fire, and the sweet sound was now heard as a song.
O Virgins sacrosanct, if ever hunger, cold, or vigils I have endured for you, time occasion spurs me that I claim reward therefor.
Now it behoves that Helicon pour forth for me, and Urania aid me with her choir to put in verse things difficult to think.
A little further on, the long tract of space which was still between us and them presented falsely what seemed seven trees of gold.
But when I had come so near to them that the common object, which deceives the sense, lost not through distance any of its attributes,
the power which supplies discourse to reason distinguished them as candlesticks, and in the voices of the song, “Hosanna.”
From above the fair array was flaming, brighter by far than the Moon in the serene of midnight, in the middle of her month.
I turned me round full of wonder to the good Virgil, and he replied to me with a look charged not less with amazement.
Then I turned back my face to the high things that were moving toward us so slowly they would have been outstripped by new-made brides.
The lady cried to me, “Why burnest thou only thus with affection for the living lights, and lookest not at that which comes behind them?”
Then saw I folk coming behind, as if after their leaders, clothed in white, and such purity there never was on earth.
The water was resplendent on the left flank, and reflected to me my left side, if I looked in it, even as a mirror.
When on my bank I had such position that only the stream separated me, in order to see better, I gave halt to my steps.
And I saw the flamelets go forward heaving the air behind them painted, and they had the semblance of streaming pennons,
so that there above it remained divided by seven stripes all in those colors whereof the sun makes his bow, and Delia her girdle.
These banners to the rear were longer than my sight, and according to my judgment the outermost were ten paces apart.
Under so fair a sky as I describe, twenty-four elders, two by two, were coming crowned with flower-de-luce.
All were singing, “Blessed thou among the daughters of Adam, and blessed forever be thy beauties.”
After the flowers, and the other fresh herbage opposite to me on the other bank, were free from those folk elect,
even as light followeth light in heaven, came behind them four living creatures, crowned each one with green leaves.
Every one was feathered with six wings, the feathers full of eyes; and the eyes of Argus were they living would be such.
To describe their forms I scatter rhymes no more, Reader; for other spending constrains me so that in this I cannot be liberal.
But read Ezekiel, who depicts them as he saw them coming from the cold region with wind, with cloud, and with fire;
and such as thou wilt find them in his pages such were they here, save that as to the wings John is with me, and differs from him.
The space between these four contained a triumphal chariot upon two wheels, which by the neck of a griffon came drawn along.
And he stretched up one and the other of his wings between the midmost stripe, and the three and three, so that he did harm to no one of them by cleaving it.
So far they rose that they were not seen. His members were of gold so far as he was bird, and the rest were white mixed with red.
Not Africanus, or indeed Augustus, gladdened Rome with so beautiful a chariot; but even that of the Sun would be poor to it,—
that of the Sun which, going astray, was consumed at the prayer of the devout Earth, when Jove in his secrecy was just.
Three ladies, at the right wheel, came dancing in a circle; one so ruddy that hardly would she have been noted in the fire;
the next was as if her flesh and bones had been made of emerald; the third seemed snow just fallen.
And now they seemed led by the white, now by the red, and from her song the others took their step both slow and swift.
On the left four robed in purple made festival, following the measure of one of them who had three eyes in her head.
Next after all the group described, I saw two old men, unlike in dress, but like in action, both dignified and staid.
The one showed himself one of the familiars of that supreme Hippocrates whom Nature made for the creatures that she holds most dear
the other showed the contrary care, with a shining and sharp sword, such that it caused me fear on the hither side of the stream.
Then I saw four humble in appearance, and behind all an old man solitary coming asleep with lively countenance.
And these seven were robed like the first band; but they made not a thicket of lilies round their heads,
rather of roses, and of other red flowers. The sight at little distance would have sworn that all were aflame above their brows.
And when the chariot was opposite to me thunder was heard, and those worthy people seemed to have further progress interdicted,
stopping there with the first ensigns.
