When the septentrion of the first heaven
which never setting knew, nor rising,
nor veil of other cloud than sin,—
and which was making every one there acquainted
with his duty, as the lower makes
whoever turns the helm to come to port,—
stopped still, the truthful people
who had come first between the griffon and it,
turned to the chariot as to their peace,
and one of them, as if sent from heaven,
singing, “Veni, sponsa, de Libano,”
cried thrice, and all the others after.
As time blessed at the last trump
will arise swiftly, each from his tomb,
singing hallelujah with recovered voice,
so upon the divine chariot,
ad vocem tanti senis, rose up a hundred
ministers and messengers of life eternal.
All were saying, “Benedictus, qui venis,”
and, scattering flowers above and around,
“Manibus o date lilia plenis.”
I have seen ere now at the beginning of the day
the eastern region all rosy,
while the rest of heaven was beautiful with fair clear sky;
and the face of the sun rise shaded,
so that through the tempering of vapors
the eye sustained it a long while.
Thus within a cloud of flowers,
which from the angelic hands was ascending,
and falling down again within and without,
with olive wreath above a white veil,
a lady, appeared to me, beneath a green mantle.
robed with the color of living flame
And my spirit that now for so long a time
had at her presence,
not been broken down, trembling with amazement,
without having more knowledge by the eyes,
through occult virtue that proceeded from her,
felt the great potency of ancient love.
Soon as upon my sight smote,
the lofty virtue which already had transfixed me
ere I was out of boyhood,
I turned me to the left with the confidence
with which the little child runs to his mother
when he is frightened, or when he is troubled,
to say to Virgil, “Less than a drachm
of blood remains in me that doth not tremble;
I recognize the signals of the ancient flame,”—
but Virgil had left us deprived
of himself; Virgil, sweetest Father,
Virgil to whom I for my salvation gave me.
Nor did all which the ancient mother lost
avail unto my cheeks, cleansed with dew,
that they should not turn dark again with tears.
Dante, though Virgil be gone away,
weep not yet, weep not yet,
for it behoves thee to weep by another sword.
Like an admiral who, on poop or on prow,
comes to see the people that are serving
on the other ships, and encourages them to do well,
upon the left border of the chariot,—
when I turned me at the sound of my own name,
which of necessity is registered here,—
I saw the Lady, who had first appeared to me
veiled beneath the angelic festival,
directing her eyes toward me across the stream
although the veil, which descended from her head,
circled by the leaf of Minerva,
did not allow her to appear distinctly.
Royally, still haughty in her mien,
she went on, as one who speaks,
and keeps back his warmest speech:
Look at me well: I am, indeed, I am, indeed, Beatrice.
How hast thou deigned to approach the mountain?
Didst thou know that man is happy here?
My eyes fell down into the clear fount;
but seeing myself in it I drew them to the grass,
such great shame burdened my brow.
As to the son the mother seems proud,
so she seemed to me; for somewhat bitter
tasteth the savor of stern pity.
She was silent, and the angels sang
of a sudden, “In te, Domine, speravi;”
but beyond “pedes meos” they did not pass.
Even as the snow, among the living rafters
upon the back of Italy, is congealed,
blown and packed by Sclavonian winds,
then melting trickles through itself,
if only the land that loses shadow breathe,
so that it seems a fire that melts the candle:
so was I without tears and sighs
before the song of those who time their notes
after the notes of the eternal circles.
But when I heard in their sweet accords
their compassion for me, more than if they had said,
“Lady, why dost thou so confound him?”
the ice that was bound tight around my heart
became breath and water, and with anguish
poured from my breast through my mouth and eyes.
She, still standing motionless on the aforesaid side
of the chariot, to those pious beings
then turned her words thus:
Ye watch in the eternal day,
so that nor night nor slumber robs from you
one step the world may make along its ways;
wherefore my reply is with greater care,
that he who is weeping yonder may understand me,
so that fault and grief may be of one measure.
Not only through the working of the great wheels,
which direct every seed to some end
according as the stars are its companions,
but through largess of divine graces,
which have for their rain vapors so lofty
that our sight goes not near thereto,—
this man was such in his new life,
virtually, that every right habit
would have made admirable proof in him.
But so much the more malign and more savage
becomes the land ill-sown and untilled,
as it has more of good terrestrial vigor.
Some time did I sustain him with my face;
showing my youthful eyes to him,
I led him with me turned in right direction.
So soon as I was upon the threshold
of my second age, and had changed life,
this one took himself from me, and gave himself to others.
When from flesh to spirit I had ascended,
and beauty and virtue were increased in me,
I was less dear and less pleasing to him;
and he turned his steps along a way not true,
following false images of good,
which pay no promise in full.
Nor did it avail me to obtain inspirations
with which, both in dream and otherwise,
I called him back; so little did he heed them.
So low he fell that all means
for his salvation were already short,
save showing him the lost people.
For this I visited the gate of the dead,
and to him, who has conducted him up hither,
my prayers were borne with weeping.
The high decree of God would be broken,
if Lethe should be passed, and such viands
should be tasted
without any scot of repentance which may pour forth tears.”
