So fixed and intent were mine eyes to relieve their ten years’ thirst, that my other senses were all extinct:
and they themselves, on one side and the other, had a wall of disregard, so did the holy smile draw them to itself with the old net;
when perforce my sight was turned toward my left by those goddesses, because I heard from them a “Too fixedly.”
And the condition which exists for seeing in eyes but just now smitten by the sun caused me to be some time without sight.
But when the sight reshaped itself to the little (I say to the little, in respect to the great object of the sense wherefrom by force I had removed myself),
I saw that the glorious army had wheeled upon its right flank, and was returning with the sun and with the seven flames in its face.
As under its shields to save itself a troop turns and wheels with its banner, before it all can change about,
that soldiery of the celestial realm which was in advance had wholly gone past us before its front beam had bent the chariot round.
Then to the wheels the ladies returned, and the griffon moved his blessed burden, in such wise however that no feather of him shook.
The beautiful lady who had drawn me at the ford, and Statius and I were following the wheel which made its orbit with the smaller arc.
So walking through the lofty wood, empty through fault of her who trusted to the serpent, an angelic song set the time to our steps.
Perhaps an arrow loosed from the bow had in three flights reached such a distance as we had advanced, when Beatrice descended.
I heard “Adam!” murmured by all: then they circled a plant despoiled of flowers and of other leafage on every bough.
Its branches, which so much the wider spread the higher up they are, would be wondered at for height by the Indians in their woods.
“Blessed art thou, Griffon, that thou dost not break off with thy beak of this wood sweet to the taste, since the belly is ill racked thereby.”
Thus around the sturdy tree the others cried; and the animal of two natures: “So is preserved the seed of all righteousness.”
And turning to the pole that he had drawn, he dragged it to the foot of the widowed trunk, and that which was of it he left bound to it.
As our plants, when the great light falls downward mingled with that which shines behind the celestial Carp,
become swollen, and then renew themselves, each in its own color, ere the sun yoke his coursers under another star,
so disclosing a color less than of roses and more than of violets, the plant renewed itself, which first had its boughs so bare.
I did not understand the hymn, and it is not sung here, which that folk then sang, nor did I hear the melody to the end.
If I could portray how the pitiless eyes sank to slumber, while hearing of Syrinx, the eyes to which too much watching cost so dear,
hike a painter who paints from a model I would depict how I fell asleep; but whoso would, let him be one who can picture slumber well.
Therefore I pass on to when I awoke, and say that a splendor rent for me the veil of sleep, and a call, “Arise, what doest thou?”
As, to see some of the flowerets of the apple-tree which makes the Angels greedy of its fruit, and makes perpetual bridal feasts in Heaven,
Peter and John and James were led, and being overcome, came to themselves at the word by which greater slumbers were broken,
and saw their band diminished alike by Moses and Elias, and the raiment of their Master changed,
so I came to myself, and saw that compassionate one standing above me, who first had been conductress of my steps along the stream;
and all in doubt I said, “Where is Beatrice?” And she, “Behold her under the new leafage sitting upon its root.
Behold the company that surrounds her; the rest are going on high behind the griffon, with sweeter song and more profound.”
And if her speech was more diffuse I know not, because already in my eyes was she who from attending to aught else had closed me in.
Alone she was sitting upon the bare ground, like a guard left there of the chariot which I had seen bound by the biform animal.
In a circle the seven Nymphs were making of themselves an enclosure for her, with those lights in their hands that are secure from Aquilo and from Auster.
“Here shalt thou be short time a forester; and thou shalt be with me without end a citizen of that Rome whereof Christ is a Roman.
Therefore for profit of the world that lives ill, keep now thine eyes upon the chariot; amid what thou seest, having returned to earth, mind that thou write.”
Thus Beatrice; and I, who at the feet of her commands was all devout, gave my mind and my eyes where she willed.
Never with so swift a motion did fire descend from a dense cloud, when it is raining from that region which stretches most remote,
as I saw the bird of Jove stoop downward through the tree, breaking the bark, as well as the flowers and new leaves;
and he struck the chariot with all his force, whereat it reeled, like a ship in a tempest beaten by the waves now to starboard, now to larboard.
Then I saw leap into the body of the triumphal vehicle a she fox, which seemed fasting from all good food;
but rebuking her for her foul sins my Lady turned her to such flight as her fleshless bones allowed.
Then, from there whence he had first come, I saw the eagle descend down into the ark of the chariot and leave it feathered from himself.
And a voice such as issues from a heart that is afflicted issued from Heaven, and thus spake, “O little bark of mine, how ill art thou laden!”
Then it seemed to me that the earth opened between the two wheels, and I saw a dragon issue from it, which through the chariot upward fixed his tail:
and, like a wasp that retracts its sting, drawing to himself his malign tail, drew out part of the bottom, and went wandering away.
That which remained covered itself again, as lively soil with grass, with the plumage, offered perhaps with sane and benign intention;
and both one and the other wheel and the pole were again covered with it in such time that a sigh holds the mouth open longer.
Thus transformed, the holy structure put forth heads upon its parts, three upon the pole, and one on each corner.
The first were horned like oxen, but the four had a single horn upon the forehead. A like prodigy was never seen before.
Secure, as fortress on a high mountain, there appeared to me a loose harlot sitting upon it, with eyes roving around.
And, as if in order that she should not be taken from him, I saw standing at her side a giant, and some while they kissed each other.
But because she turned her lustful and wandering eye on me that fierce paramour scourged her from head to foot.
Then full of jealousy, and cruel with anger, he loosed the monster, and drew it through the wood so far that only of that he made a shield from me
for the harlot and for the strange beast.
