“Deus, venerunt gentes,” alternating
now three now four, a sweet psalmody,
the ladies began, and weeping.
And Beatrice, sighing and compassionate,
was listening to them so moved that scarce
more changed was Mary at the cross.
But when the other virgins gave place
to her to speak, risen upright upon her feet,
she answered, colored like fire:
Modicum, et non videbitis me,
et iterum, my beloved Sisters,
Modicum, et vos videbitis me.
Then she set all the seven in front of her;
and behind her, by a sign only, she placed
me, and the Lady, and the Sage who had stayed.
So she moved on; and I do not think
her tenth step had been set upon the ground,
when with her eyes my eyes she smote,
and with tranquil aspect “Come more quickly,”
said to me, so that if I speak with thee,
to listen to me thou mayst be well placed.”
So soon as I was with her as I should be,
she said to me, “Brother, why dost thou not venture
to ask of me, now thou art coming with me?”
Even as befalls those who with excess of reverence
are speaking in presence of their superiors,
and drag not their voice living to the teeth,
it befell me that without perfect sound
I began, “My Lady, my need
you know, and that which is good for it.”
And site to me, “From fear and from shame
I wish that thou henceforth divest thyself,
so that thou speak no more like a man who dreams.
Know thou, that the vessel which the serpent broke,
was, and is not; but let him who is to blame therefor believe
that the vengeance of God fears not sops.
Not for all time shall be without an heir
the eagle that left its feathers on the car,
whereby it became a monster, and then a prey.
For I see surely, and therefore I tell it,
stars already close at hand, to give to us a time
secure from every obstacle and from every hindrance,
in which a Five hundred, Ten, and Five
sent by God shall slay the thievish woman
and that giant who with her is delinquent.
And perchance my narration, dark
as Themis and the Sphinx, less persuades thee,
because after their fashion it clouds the understanding.
But soon the facts will be the Naiades
that shall solve this difficult enigma,
without harm of flocks or of harvest.
Do thou note; and even as they are borne from me,
do thou so report these words to those alive
with that life which is a running unto death;
and have in mind when thou writest them,
not to conceal what thou hast seen the plant,
which now has been twice plundered here.
Whoso robs that, or breaks it,
with blasphemy in act offends God,
who only for His own use created it holy.
For biting that, in pain and in desire,
five thousand years and more, the first soul
longed for Him who punished on Himself the bite.
Thy wit sleeps, if it deem not
that for a special reason it is high
so and so inverted at its top.
And if thy vain thoughts had not been as water of Elsa
round about thy mind,
and their pleasantness as Pyramus to the mulberry,
only by so many circumstances
the justice of God in the interdict
thou hadst recognized morally upon the tree.
But since I see thee in thy understanding
made of stone, and thus stony, dark,
so that the light of my speech dazzles thee,
I would yet—and if not written, at least depicted,—
that thou bear it hence within thee,—for the reason
that the pilgrim’s staff is carried wreathed with palm.”
And I, “Even as wax by a seal
which alters not the imprinted figure,
is my brain now stamped by you.
But why so far above my sight,
does your desired word fly
that the more it strives the more it loses it?”
“In order that thou mayst know,” she said, “that school
which thou hast followed, and mayst see how its doctrine
can follow my word
and mayst see your path from the divine,
distant so far, as is remote
from earth the heaven which highest hastens.”
Whereon I replied to her, “I do not remember
that I ever estranged myself from you,
nor have I conscience of it that may sting me.”
“And if thou canst not remember it,”
smiling she replied, “now bethink thee
how this day thou hast drunk of Lethe.
And if from smoke fire be inferred,
such oblivion clearly proves
fault in thy will elsewhere intent.
Truly my words shall henceforth be naked
so far as it shall be befitting
to uncover them to thy rude sight.”
And more coruscant, and with slower steps,
the sun was holding the circle of the meridian,
which is set here or there according to the aspect,
when the seven ladies stopped even as he,
who goes before a troop as guide, stops
if he find some strange thing on his track,
at the edge of a pale shade,
such as beneath green leaves and black boughs
the Alp casts over its cold streams.
In front of them, Euphrates and Tigris
it seemed to me I saw issue from one fountain,
and, like friends, part slow from one another.
“O light, O glory of the human race,
what water is this which here spreads
from one source, and from itself withdraws itself?”
To this prayer it was said to me, “Pray
Matilda that she tell it to thee;” and here answered,
as one does who frees himself from blame,
the beautiful Lady, “This and other things
have been told him by me; and I am sure
that the water of Lethe has not hidden them from him.”
And Beatrice, “Perhaps a greater care
which oftentimes deprives the memory
has darkened the eyes of his mind.
But see Eunoe, which flows forth yonder,
lead him to it, and, as thou art accustomed,
revive his extinct power.”
As a gentle soul which makes not excuse,
but makes its own will of another’s will,
soon as by a sign it is outwardly disclosed,
even so, when I was taken by her,
the beautiful Lady moved on, and to Statius
said, with manner of a lady, “Come with him.”
If I had, Reader, longer space
for writing I would yet partly sing
the sweet draught which never would have sated me.
But, because all the leaves are full,
destined for this second canticle,
the curb of my art lets me go no further.
I returned from the most holy wave,
renovated as new plants
renewed with new foliage,
pure and disposed to mount unto the stars.
