The glory of Him who moves everything
penetrates through the universe, and shines
in one part more and in another less.
In the heaven that receives most of its light
I have been, and have seen things
which he who descends from thereabove neither knows how nor is able to recount;
because, drawing near to its own desire,
our understanding enters so deep,
that the memory cannot follow.
Truly whatever of the Holy Realm
I could treasure up in my mind
shall now be the theme of my song.
O good Apollo, for this last labor
make me such a vessel of thy power
as thou demandest for the gift of the loved laurel
Thus far one summit of Parnassus
has been enough for me, but now with both
I need to enter the remaining, arena.
Enter into my breast, and breathe thou
in such wise as when thou drewest Marsyas
from out the sheath of his limbs.
O divine Power, if thou lend thyself to me
so that the image of the Blessed Realm
imprinted within my head, I may make manifest
thou shalt see me come to thy chosen tree,
and crown myself then with those leaves
of which the theme and thou will make me worthy.
So rarely, Father, are they gathered
for triumph or of Caesar or of poet
(fault and shame of the human wills),
that bring forth joy unto the joyous
Delphic deity should the leaf
Peneian, whenever it makes any one to long for it.
Great flame follows a little spark:
perhaps after me with better voices
prayer shall be made whereto Cyrrha may respond.
rises to mortals through different passages
The lamp of the world, but from that
which joins four circles with three crosses
with better course and with a better star,
it issues conjoined, and the mundane wax
it tempers and seals more after its own fashion
Had made morning there and evening here
such a passage, and Almost all was there white
that hemisphere, and the other part black,
when I saw Beatrice upon the left side
turned, and looking into the sun:
never did eagle so fix himself upon it.
And even as a second ray is wont
to issue from the first, and mount upward again,
like a pilgrim who wishes to return;
thus of her action, infused through the eyes
into my imagination, mine was made,
and I fixed my eyes upon the sun beyond our use.
Much is allowed there which here is not allowed
to our faculties, thanks to the place
made for the human race as its proper, abode.
Not long did I endure it, nor so little
that I did not see it sparkling round about,
like iron that issues boiling from the fire.
And on a sudden, day seemed
to be added to day, as if He who is able
had adorned the heaven with another sun.
Beatrice wholly fixed on the eternal wheels,
was standing with her eyes; and on her I
fixed my eyes from thereabove removed.
Looking at her I inwardly became such
as Glaucus became on tasting of the herb
which made him consort in the sea of the other gods.
Transhumanizing be signified in words
cannot; therefore let the example suffice
for him to whom grace reserves experience.
If I was only what of me thou didst
the last create, O Love that governest the heavens,
Thou knowest, who with Thy light didst lift me.
When the revolution which Thou makest eternal,
being desired, made me attent unto itself
with the harmony which Thou attunest and modulatest,
then seemed to me so much of the heaven enkindled
by the flame of the sun, that rain or river
never made so broad a lake.
The novelty of the sound and the great light
concerning their cause kindled in me a desire
never before felt with such acuteness.
Whereupon she, who saw me as I see myself,
to quiet my perturbed mind
ere I mine to ask, opened her mouth, and began,
“Thou thyself makest thyself dull
with false imagining, so that thou seest not
what thou wouldst see, if thou hadst shaken it off.
Thou art not on earth, as thou believest;
but lightning, flying from its proper site,
never ran as thou who thereunto returnest.”
If I was divested of my first doubt
by these brief little smiled- out words,
within a new one was I the more enmeshed.
And I said, “Already I rested content
concerning a great wonder; but now I wonder
how I can transcend these light bodies.”
Whereupon she, after a pitying sigh,
directed her eyes toward me, with that look
which a mother turns on her delirious son,
and she began, “All things whatsoever
have order among themselves; and this is the form
which makes the universe like to God.
Here the high creatures see the imprint
of the eternal Goodness, which is the end
for which the aforesaid rule is made.
In the order of which I speak, are arranged
all natures, by diverse lots,
more or less near to their source;
wherefore they are moved to diverse ports
through the great sea of being, and each one
with an instinct given to it which may bear it on.
This bears the fire upward toward the moon;
this is the motive force in mortal hearts;
this binds together and unites the earth.
Nor only the created things which are outside
intelligence, does this bow shoot forth,
but also those which have understanding and love.
The Providence that adjusts all this,
with its own light makes forever quiet the heaven
within which that revolves which hath the greatest speed.
And thither now, as to a site decreed,
the virtue of that cord bears us on
which directs to a joyful mark whatever it shoots.
True is it, that as the form often accords not
to the intention of the art,
because the material is deaf to respond,
so deviates from this course;
the creature sometimes for it has power,
though thus impelled, to incline in another direction
(even as may be seen to fall),
the fire of a cloud, if the first impetus,
bent aside by false pleasure, turn it earthwards.
Thou shouldst not, if I deem aright, wonder more
at thy ascent, than at a stream
if from a high mountain it descends to the base.
A marvel it would be in thee, if, deprived
of hindrance, thou hadst sat below,
even as quiet in living fire on earth would be.”
Thereon she turned again toward heaven her face.
