The glory of Him who moves everything penetrates through the universe, and shines in one part more and in another less.
In the heaven that receives most of its light I have been, and have seen things which he who descends from thereabove neither knows how nor is able to recount;
because, drawing near to its own desire, our understanding enters so deep, that the memory cannot follow.
Truly whatever of the Holy Realm I could treasure up in my mind shall now be the theme of my song.
O good Apollo, for this last labor make me such a vessel of thy power as thou demandest for the gift of the loved laurel.
Thus far one summit of Parnassus has been enough for me, but now with both I need to enter the remaining, arena.
Enter into my breast, and breathe thou in such wise as when thou drewest Marsyas from out the sheath of his limbs.
O divine Power, if thou lend thyself to me so that I may make manifest the image of the Blessed Realm imprinted within my head,
thou shalt see me come to thy chosen tree, and crown myself then with those leaves of which the theme and thou will make me worthy.
So rarely, Father, are they gathered for triumph or of Caesar or of poet (fault and shame of the human wills),
that the Peneian leaf should bring forth joy unto the joyous Delphic deity, whenever it makes any one to long for it.
Great flame follows a little spark: perhaps after me prayer shall be made with better voices, whereto Cyrrha may respond.
The lamp of the world rises to mortals through different passages, but from that which joins four circles with three crosses
it issues with better course and conjoined with a better star, and it tempers and seals the mundane wax more after its own fashion
Almost such a passage had made morning there and evening here; and there all that hemisphere was white, and the other part black,
when I saw Beatrice turned upon the left side, and looking into the sun: never did eagle so fix himself upon it.
And even as a second ray is wont to issue from the first, and mount upward again, like a pilgrim who wishes to return;
thus of her action, infused through the eyes into my imagination, mine was made, and I fixed my eyes upon the sun beyond our use.
Much is allowed there which here is not allowed to our faculties, thanks to the place made for the human race as its proper, abode.
Not long did I endure it, nor so little that I did not see it sparkling round about, like iron that issues boiling from the fire.
And on a sudden, day seemed to be added to day, as if He who is able had adorned the heaven with another sun.
Beatrice was standing with her eyes wholly fixed on the eternal wheels, and on her I fixed my eyes from thereabove removed.
Looking at her I inwardly became such as Glaucus became on tasting of the herb which made him consort in the sea of the other gods.
Transhumanizing cannot be signified in words; therefore let the example suffice for him to whom grace reserves experience.
If I was only what of me thou didst the last create, O Love that governest the heavens, Thou knowest, who with Thy light didst lift me.
When the revolution which Thou, being desired, makest eternal, made me attent unto itself with the harmony which Thou attunest and modulatest,
so much of the heaven then seemed to me enkindled by the flame of the sun, that rain or river never made so broad a lake.
The novelty of the sound and the great light kindled in me a desire concerning their cause, never before felt with such acuteness.
Whereupon she, who saw me as I see myself, to quiet my perturbed mind opened her mouth, ere I mine to ask, and began,
“Thou thyself makest thyself dull with false imagining, so that thou seest not what thou wouldst see, if thou hadst shaken it off.
Thou art not on earth, as thou believest; but lightning, flying from its proper site, never ran as thou who thereunto returnest.”
If I was divested of my first doubt by these brief little smiled- out words, within a new one was I the more enmeshed.
And I said, “Already I rested content concerning a great wonder; but now I wonder how I can transcend these light bodies.”
Whereupon she, after a pitying sigh, directed her eyes toward me, with that look which a mother turns on her delirious son,
and she began, “All things whatsoever have order among themselves; and this is the form which makes the universe like to God.
Here the high creatures see the imprint of the eternal Goodness, which is the end for which the aforesaid rule is made.
In the order of which I speak, all natures are arranged, by diverse lots, more or less near to their source;
wherefore they are moved to diverse ports through the great sea of being, and each one with an instinct given to it which may bear it on.
This bears the fire upward toward the moon; this is the motive force in mortal hearts; this binds together and unites the earth.
Nor does this bow shoot forth. Only the created things which are outside intelligence, but also those which have understanding and love.
The Providence that adjusts all this, with its own light makes forever quiet the heaven within which that revolves which hath the greatest speed.
And thither now, as to a site decreed, the virtue of that cord bears us on which directs to a joyful mark whatever it shoots.
True is it, that as the form often accords not to the intention of the art, because the material is deaf to respond,
so the creature sometimes deviates from this course; for it has power, though thus impelled, to incline in another direction
(even as the fire of a cloud may be seen to fall), if the first impetus, bent aside by false pleasure, turn it earthwards.
Thou shouldst not, if I deem aright, wonder more at thy ascent, than at a stream if from a high mountain it descends to the base.
A marvel it would be in thee, if, deprived of hindrance, thou hadst sat below, even as quiet in living fire on earth would be.”
Thereon she turned again toward heaven her face.
