O ye, who are in a little bark,
desirous to listen, following
behind my craft which singing passes on,
turn to see again Your shores;
put not out upon the deep; for haply
losing me, ye would remain astray.
The water that I sail was never crossed.
Minerva inspires, and Apollo guides me,
and nine Muses point out to me the Bears.
Ye other few, who have lifted tip your necks
be. times to the bread of the Angels, oil which
one here subsists, but never becomes sated of it,
ye may well put forth over the salt deep,
your vessel, keeping my wake
before you on the water which turns smooth again.
Those glorious ones who passed over to Colchos
wondered not as ye shall do,
when they saw Jason become a ploughman.
The concreate and perpetual thirst
for the deiform realm was bearing us on
swift almost as ye see the heavens
Beatrice was looking upward, and I upon her,
and perhaps in such time as a quarrel rests,
and flies, and from the notch is unlocked,
I saw myself arrived where a wonderful thing
drew my sight to itself; and therefore she,
from whom the working of my mind could not be hid,
turned toward me, glad as beautiful.
“Uplift thy grateful mind to God,” she said to me,
“who with the first star has conjoined us.”
It seemed to me that a cloud had covered us,
lucid, dense, solid, and polished,
like a diamond which the sun had struck.
Within itself the eternal pearl
had received us, even as water receives
a ray of light, remaining unbroken.
If I was body (and here it is not conceivable
how one dimension brooked another,
which needs must be if body enter body)
the desire ought the more to kindle us
to see that Essence, in which is seen
how our nature and God were united.
There will be seen that which we hold by faith,
not demonstrated, but it will be known of itself
like the first truth which man believes.
I replied, “My Lady,
devoutly to the utmost that I can, do I thank him
who from the mortal world has removed me.
But tell me what are the dusky marks
of this body, which there below on earth
make people fable about Cain?”
She smiled somewhat, and then “If the opinion errs
of mortals,” she said,
where the key of sense unlocks not,
surely the shafts of wonder ought not now to pierce thee,
since following the senses thou seest that
the reason has short wings.
But tell me what thou thyself thinkest of it.”
And I, “That which here above appears to us diverse,
I believe is caused by rare and dense bodies.”
And she, “Surely enough thou shalt see that thy belief is submerged
in error, if then listenest well
to the argument that I shall make against it.
The eighth sphere displays to you many
lights, which in quality and quantity
may be noted of different aspects.
If rare and dense effected all this,
one single virtue would be in all,
more or less or equally distributed.
Different virtues must needs be fruits
of formal principles; and these, all but one,
by thy reckoning, would be destroyed.
Further, if rarity were the cause of that darkness
of which you ask, either through and through,
this planet would be thus deficient of its matter
or else as a body distributes
the fat and the loan, so this
would interchange the leaves in its volume.
If the first were the case, it would be manifest
in the eclipses of the sun, by the shining through of
the light, as when it is poured out upon any other rare body.
This is not so; therefore we must look
at the other, and if it happen that I quash this other,
thy opinion will be falsified.
If it be that this rare passes not through,
there needs must be a limit, beyond which
its contrary allows it not to pass further;
and thence the ray from another body is poured back,
just as color returns through a glass
which hides lead behind itself.
Now thou wilt say that the ray shows itself dimmer
there than in the other parts,
by being there reflected from further back.
From this objection may deliver thee,
experiment, if ever thou try it.
which is wont to be the fountain to the streams of your arts,
Thou shalt take three mirrors, and set two of them
at an equal distance from thee, and let the other, further removed,
meet thine eyes between the first two.
Turning toward them, cause a light to be placed behind thy back,
which may illumine the three mirrors,
and return to thee thrown back front all.
Although reach thee not so great in quantity,
thou wilt then see the more distant image
how it cannot but be of equal brightness.
Now, as beneath the blows of the warm rays
that which lies under the snow remains bare
both of the former color and the cold,
thee, thus remaining in thy intellect, will I inform with light so living that it shall tremble in its aspect to thee.
[2[My argument has removed the error which covered thy mind, and nov I will tell thee
the true cause of the variety in the surface of the moon.
Within the heaven of the divine peace
revolves a body, in whose virtue
lies the being of all that it contains.
The following heaven which has so many sights,
distributes that being through divers essences
from it distinct, and by it contained.
The other spheres, by various differences,
the distinctions which they have within themselves
dispose unto their ends and their seeds.
These organs of the world thus proceed,
as thou now seest, from grade to grade;
for they receivefrom above, and operate below.
Observe me well, how I advance
through this place to the truth which thou desirest,
so that hereafter thou mayest know to keep the ford alone.
The motion and the virtue of the holy spheres,
as the work of the hammer by the smith.
must needs be inspired by blessed motors,
And the heaven, which so many lights make beautiful,
from the deep Mind which revolves it,
takes its image, and makes thereof a seal.
And as the soul within your dust
is diffused through different members, and conformed
to divers potencies,
so the Intelligence its own goodness
displays multiplied through the stars,
itself circling upon its own unity.
Divers virtue makes divers alloy
with the precious body that it quickens,
in which, even as life in you, it is bound.
Because of the glad nature whence, it flows,
the virtue mingled through the body shines,
as gladness through the living pupil.
From this, comes whatso between light and light
seems different, not from dense and rare;
this is the formal principle which produces,
conformed unto its goodness, the dark and the bright.”
