That sun which first had heated my breast with love, proving and refuting, had uncovered to me the sweet aspect of fair truth;
and I, in order to confess myself corrected and assured so far as was needful, raised my head more erect to speak.
But a vision appeared which held me to itself so close in order to be seen, that of my confession I remembered not.
As through transparent and polished glasses, or through clear and tranquil waters, not so deep that their bed be lost,
the lineaments of our faces return so feebly that a pearl on a white brow comes not less readily to our eyes,
so I saw many faces eager to speak; wherefore I ran into the error contrary to that which kindled love between the man and the fountain.
Suddenly, even as I became aware of them, supposing them mirrored semblances, I turned my eyes to see of whom they were;
and I saw nothing; and I turned them forward again, straight into the light of the sweet guide who, smiling, was glowing in her holy eyes.
“Wonder not because I smile,” she said to me, “at thy puerile thought, since thy foot trusts itself not yet upon the truth,
but turns thee, as it is wont, to emptiness. True substances are these which thou seest, here relegated through failure in their vows.
Therefore speak with them, and hear, and believe; for the veracious light which satisfies them allows them not to turn their feet from itself.”
And I directed me to the shade that seemed most eager to speak, and I began, even like a man whom too strong wish confuses,
“O well-created spirit, who in the rays of life eternal tastest the sweetness, which untasted never is understood,
it will be gracious to me, if thou contentest me with thy name, and with your destiny.” Whereon she promptly, and with smiling eyes,
“Our charity locks not its door to a just wish, more than that which wills that all its court be like itself.
I was in the world a virgin sister, and if thy mind well regards, my being more beautiful will not conceal me from thee;
but thou wilt recognize that I am Piccarda, who, placed here with these other blessed Ones, am blessed in the slowest sphere.
Our affections, which are inflamed only in the pleasure of the Holy Spirit, rejoice in being formed according to His order;
and this allotment, which appears so low, is forsooth given to us, because our vows were neglected or void in some part.”
Whereon I to her, In your marvellous aspects there shines I know not what divine which transmutes you from our first conceptions;
therefore I was not swift in remembering; but now that which you say to me assists me, so that refiguring is plainer to me.
But tell me, ye who are happy here, do ye desire a highher place, in order to see more, or to make yourselves more friends?”
With those other shades she first smiled a little; then answered me so glad, that she seemed to burn in the first fire of love,
“Brother, virtue of charity quiets our will, and makes us wish only for that which we have, and for aught else makes us not thirsty.
Should we desire to be higher up, our desires would be discordant with the will of Him who assigns us to this place,
which thou wilt see is not possible in these circles, if to be in charity is here necesse, and if its nature thou dost well consider.
Nay, it is essential to this blessed existence to hold ourselves within the divine will, whereby our very wills are made one.
So that as we are, from stage to stage throughout this realm, to all the realm is pleasing, as to the King who inwills us with His will.
And His will is our peace; it is that sea whereunto is moving all that which It creates and which nature makes.”
Clear was it then to me, how everywhere in Heaven is Paradise, although the grace of the Supreme Good rains not there in one measure.
But even as it happen, if one food sates, and for another the appetite still remains, that this is asked for, and that declined with thanks;
so did I, with gesture and with speech, to learn from her, what was the web whereof she did not draw the shuttle to the head.
“Perfect life and high merit in-heaven a lady higher up,” she said to me, “according to whose rule, in your world below, there are who vest and veil themselves,
so that till death they may wake and sleep with that Spouse who accepts every vow which love conforms unto His pleasure.
A young girl, I fled from the world to follow her, and in her garb I shut myself, and pledged me to the pathway of her order.
Afterward men, more used to ill than good, dragged me forth from the sweet cloister; and God knows what then my life became.
And this other splendor, which shows itself to thee at my right side, and which glows with all the light of our sphere,
that which I say of me understands of herself. A sister was she; and in like manner from her head the shadow of the sacred veils was taken.
But after she too was returned unto the world against her liking and against good usage, from the veil of the heart she was never unbound.
This is the light of the great Constance, who from the second wind of Swabia produced the third and the last power.”
Thus she spoke to me, and then began singing “Ave Maria,” and Singing vanished, like a heavy thing through deep water.
My sight, that followed her so far as was possible, after it lost her turned to the mark of greater desire,
and wholly rendered itself to Beatrice; but she so flashed upon my gaze that at first the sight endured it not:
and this made me more slow in questioning.
