Between two viands, distant and attractive in like measure,
a free man would die of hunger, before
he would bring one of them to his teeth.
Thus a lamb would stand between two ravenings
of fierce wolves, fearing equally;
thus would stand a dog between two does.
Hence if I was silent, I blame not myself,
urged by my doubts in like measure;
nor, since it was necessary, do I commend.
I was silent, but my desire was depicted
on my face, and the questioning with that
far more fervent than by distinct speech.
Beatrice did what Daniel did,
delivering Nebuchadnezzar from anger,
which had made him unjustly cruel,
and said, “I see clearly how one and the other desire draws thee,
so that thy care
so binds itself that it breathes not forth.
Thou reasonest, 'If the good will endure,
by what reckoning doth the violence of others
lessen for me the measure of desert?'
Further, it gives thee occasion for doubt,
that the souls appear to return to the stars,
in accordance with the opinion of Plato.
These are the questions that
thrust equally upon thy wish; and therefore first
I will treat of that which hath the most venom.
Of the Seraphim he who is most in God,
Moses, Samuel, and whichever John
thou wilt take, I say, and even Mary,
have not their seats in another heaven
than those spirits who just now appeared to thee,
nor have they more or fewer years for their existence;
but all make beautiful the first circle,
and have sweet life in different measure,
through feeling more or less the eternal breath.
They showed themselves here, not because
this sphere is allotted to them, but to afford sign
of the celestial condition which is least exalted.
To speak thus is befitting to your mind,
since only by objects of the sense doth it apprehend
that which it then makes worthy of the understanding.
For this reason the Scripture condescends
to your capacity, and attributes feet and hands
to God, while meaning otherwise;
and Holy Church with human aspect
represents to you Gabriel and Michael
and the other who made Tobias whole again.
That which Timaeus reasons of the souls
is not like this which is seen here,
since it seems that he thinks as he says.
He says that the soul returns to its own star,
believing it to have been severed thence,
when nature gave it as the form.
And perchance his opinion is of other guise
than his words sound, and may be
of a meaning not to be derided
If he means that
the honor of their influence and the blame returns to these wheels, perhaps
his bow hits on some truth.
This principle, ill understood, formerly turned awry
almost the whole world, so that it ran astray in naming Jove,
Mercury, and Mars.
The other dubitation which disturbs thee
has less venom, for its malice
could not lead thee from me elsewhere.
That our justice seems unjust
in the eyes of mortals is argument
of faith, and not of heretical iniquity.
But in order that your perception may
surely penetrate unto this truth,
I will make thee content, as thou desirest.
Though there be violence when he who suffers
nowise consents to him who compels,
these souls were not by reason of that excused;
for will, unless it wills, is not quenched,
but does as nature does in fire,
though violence a thousand times may wrest it.
Wherefore if it bend much or little,
it follows the force; and thus these did,
having power to return to the holy place.
If their will had been entire,
such as held Lawrence on the gridiron,
and made Mucius severe unto his hand,
it would have urged them back, along the road
on which they had been dragged; so soon as they were loosed,
but will so firm is too rare.
And by these words, if thou hast gathered
them up as thou shouldst, is the argument quashed
that would have given thee annoy yet many times.
“But now another path runs traverse
before thine eyes, such that by thyself
thou wouldst not issue forth therefrom ere thou wert weary.
I have put it in thy mind for certain,
that a soul in bliss cannot lie,
since it is always near to the Primal Truth;
and then thou hast heard from Piccarda
that Constance retained affection for the veil;
so that she seems in this to contradict me.
Often ere now, brother, has it happened
that, in order to escape peril, against one's liking
that which it was not meet to do has been done;
even as Alcmaeon (who thereto entreated
by his father, slew his own mother),
not to lose piety, pitiless became.
On this point, I wish thee to think
that the violence is mingled with the will, and they so act
that the offences cannot be excused.
Absolute will consents not to the wrong;
but the will in so far consents thereto, as it fears,
if it draw back, to fall into greater trouble.
Therefore when Piccarda says that,
she means it of the absolute will; and I
of the other so that we both speak truth alike.”
Such was the current of the holy stream
which issued from the fount whence every truth flows forth;
and such it set at rest one and the other desire.
“O beloved of the First Lover, O divine one,”
said I then, “whose speech inundates me,
and warms me so that more and more it quickens me,
my affection is not so profound
that it can suffice to render to you grace for grace,
but may He who sees and can, respond for this.
I clearly see that never is satisfied
our intellect unless the Truth illume it,
outside of which no truth extends.
In that it reposes, as a wild beast in his lair,
soon as it has reached it: and it can reach it;
otherwise every desire would be in vain.
Because of this, in likeness of a shoot, springs up
at the foot of the truth; the doubt, and it is nature
which urges us to the summit from height to height.
This invites me, this gives me assurance,
Lady, with reverence to ask you
of another truth which is obscure to me.
I wish to know if man can make satisfaction to you
for defective vows with other goods,
so that in your scales they may not be light?”
looked at we with eyes, full
of the sparks of love, such divine
that my power, vanquished, turned its back,
and almost I lost myself with eyes cast down.
