If I flame upon thee in the heat of love,
beyond the fashion that on earth is seen,
go that I vanquish the valor of thine eyes,
marvel not, for it proceeds
from perfect vision, which according as it apprehends,
so moves its feet to the apprehended good.
I see clearly how already shines
in thy intellect the eternal light,
which, being seen, alone ever enkindles love.
And if any other thing seduce your love,
it is naught but some vestige of that,
illrecognized, which therein shines through.
Thou wishest to know if with other service
for a defective vow so much can be rendered
as may secure the soul from suit.
Thus Beatrice began this canto,
and even as one who breaks not off his speech,
she thus continued her holy discourse.
The greatest gift which God in His largess
bestowed in creating, and the most conformed unto His goodness
and that which He esteems the most,
was the freedom of the will,
with which all the creatures of intelligence,
and they alone, were and are endowed.
Now will appear to thee, if from this thou reasonest,
the high worth of the vow, if it be such
that God consent when thou consentest;
for, in closing the compact between God and man,
sacrifice is made of this treasure,
which is such as I say, and it is made by its own act.
What then can be rendered in compensation?
If thou thinkest to make good use of that which thou hast offered,
with illgotten gain thou wouldst do good work.
Thou art now assured of the greater point;
but since Holy Church in this gives dispensation,
which seems contrary to the truth which I have disclosed to thee,
it behoves thee still to sit a little at table,
because the tough food which thou hast taken
requires still some aid for thy digestion.
Open thy mind to that which I reveal to thee,
and enclose it therewithin; for doth not make knowledge.”
to have heard without retaining
Two things combine in the essence
of this sacrifice; the one is that
of which it consists, the other is the covenant.
This last is never cancelled
if it be not kept; and concerning this
has my preceding speech been so precise.
On this account it was necessary for the Hebrews
still to make offering, although some part of the offering
might be changed, as thou shouldst know.
The other, which as the matter is known to thee,
may truly be such that one errs not
if for some other matter it be changed.
But let not any one shift the load upon his shoulder
at his own will, without the turning
both of the white and of the yellow key.
And let him deem every permutation foolish,
if the thing laid down in the thing taken up,
as four in six be not included.
Therefore whatever thing is, of such great weight
through its own worth, that it can draw down every balance,
cannot be made good with other spending.
Let not mortals take a vow in jest;
be faithful, and not squint-eyed in doing this,
as Jephthah was in his first offering;
to whom it better behoved to say, 'I have done ill,'
than, by keeping his vow, to do worse. And in like manner foolish;
thou mayest find the great leader of the Greeks
wherefore Iphigenia wept for her fair face,
and made weep for her both the simple and the wise,
who heard speak of such like observance.
Be, ye Christians, more grave in moving;
be not like a feather on every wind,
and think not that every water can wash you.
Ye have the Old and the New Testament,
and the Shepherd of the Church, who guides you;
let this suffice you for your salvation.
If evil covetousness cry aught else to you,
be ye men, and not silly sheep,
so that the Jew among you may not laugh at you.
Act not like the lamb, that leaves the milk
of his mother, and, simple and wanton,
at its own pleasure combats with itself.
Thus Beatrice to me, even as I write;
then turned herself again all desireful
to that region where the world is most alive.
Her silence, and her transmuted countenance
imposed silence on my eager mind,
which already had new questions in advance.
And even as an arrow, that hits the mark
before the bowstring is quiet,
so we ran into the second realm.
Here I saw my lady so joyous
as she entered into the light of that heaven,
that thereby the planet became more lucent.
And if the star war, changed and smiled,
what did I become,
who even by my nature am transmutable in every wise!
As in a fishpond, which is tranquil and pure,
the fish draw to that which comes from without
in such manner that they deem. it their food,
so indeed I saw more than a thousand splendors
drawing toward us, and in each one was heard,—
“Lo, one who shall increase our loves!”
And as each came to us,
the shade was seen full of joy
in the bright effulgence that issued from it.
Think, Reader, if that which is here begun
should not proceed, how thou wouldst have
distressful want of knowing more;
and by thyself thou wilt see how from these
desirous I was to hear of their conditions,
as they became manifest to mine eyes.
O well-born, to whom
Grace concedes to see the thrones of the eternal triumph
ere the warfare is abandoned,
with the light which spreads through the whole heaven
we are enkindled, and therefore if thou desirest
to make thyself clear concerning us, at thine own pleasure sate thyself.”
Thus by one of those pious spirits
was said to me; and by Beatrice, “Speak, speak
securely, and trust even as to gods.”
“I see clearly, how thou dost nest thyself
in thine ownlight, and that by thine eyes thou drawest it,
because they sparkle when thou smilest;
but I know not who thou art, nor why thou hast,
O worthy soul, thy station in the sphere
which is veiled to mortals by another's rays.”
This I said, addressed unto the light
which first had spoken to me; whereon it became
more lucent far than it had been.
Even as the sun, which, conceals itself
by excess of light, when the heat has consumed
the tempering of dense vapors,
so, through greater joy, bid itself from me
within its own radiance, the holy shape
and thus close enclosed, it answered me
in the fashion that the following canto sings.
