“Osanna sanctus Deus Sabaoth,
superillustrans claritate tua
felices ignes horum malacoth!”
—thus, turning to its own melody,
this substance was seen by me to sing,
upon which a double light is twinned.
And it and the others moved with their dance,
and like swiftest sparks
veiled themselves to me with sudden distance.
I was in doubt, and was saying, “Tell her, tell her,”
to myself, I was saying, “tell her, my Lady,
who slakes my thirst with her sweet distillings;
but that reverence which lords it
altogether over me, only by BE and by ICE,
bowed me again like one who drowses.
Little did Beatrice endure me thus,
and she began, irradiating me with a smile
such as would make a man in the fire happy,
According to my infallible advisement,
how a just vengeance could be justly avenged
has set thee thinking.
But I will quickly loose thy mind:
and do thou listen, for my words
will make thee a present of a great doctrine.
“By not enduring
a curb upon the power which wills for his own good, that man who was not born,—
damning himself, damned all his offspring;
wherefore the human race lay sick
below for many centuries, in great error,
till it pleased the Word of God to descend
the nature which had removed itself from its Maker.
where He united with Himself in person
by the sole act of His eternal love,
Now direct thy sight to the discourse which follows.
This nature, united with its Maker,
became sincere and good, as it had been created;
but by itself it had been banished
from Paradise, because it turned aside
from the way of truth and from its own life.
The punishment therefore which the cross afforded,
if it be measured by the nature assumed,
none ever so justly stung;
and, likewise, none was ever of such great wrong,
regarding the Person who suffered,
with whom this nature was united.
Therefore from one act issued things diverse;
for unto God and unto the Jews one death was pleasing:
by it earth trembled and the heavens were opened.
No more henceforth ought it to seem perplexing to thee,
when it is said that a just vengeance
was afterward avenged by a just court,
But I see now thy mind tied up,
from thought to thought, within a knot
the loosing of which is awaited with great desire,
Thou sayest, 'I discern clearly that which I bear;
but it is occult to we why God should will
only this mode for our redemption.'
This decree, brother, stands buried
to the eyes of every one whose wit
is not full grown in the flame of love.
Truly, inasmuch as on this mark
there is much gazing, and little is discerned,
I will tell why such mode was most worthy.
The Divine Goodness, which from Itself spurns
all rancor, burning in Itself so sparkles
that It displays the eternal beauties.
That which distils immediately from It,
thereafter has no end, for Its imprint is not removed.
when It seals,
That which from It immediately rains down
is wholly free, because it is not subject
unto the power of the new things.
It is the most conformed to It, and therefore pleases It the most;
for the Holy Ardor which irradiates every thing
is most living in what is most resemblance to Itself.
With all these things is advantaged
the human creature, and if one fail,
he needs must fall from his nobility.
Sin alone is that which disfranchises him,
and makes him unlike the Supreme Good,
so that by Its light he is little illumined.
And to his dignity he never returns,
unless, where sin makes void, he fill up
for evil pleasures with just penalties.
Your nature, when it sinned totally
in its seed, from these dignities,
even as from Paradise, was removed;
nor could they be recovered, if thou considerest
full subtly, by any way,
without passing by one of these fords:—
either that God alone by His courtesy
should forgive, or that man by himself
should make satisfaction for his folly.
Fix now thine eye within the abyss
of the eternal counsel, as thou art able
fixed as closely on my speech.
Man within his own limits could
never make satisfaction, through not being able to descend so far
with humility in subsequent obedience,
as disobeying he intended to ascend;
and this is the reason why man was
excluded from power to make satisfaction by himself.
Therefore it behoved God by His own paths
to restore man to his entire life,
I mean by one, or else by both.
But because the work is so much the more pleasing,
of the workman, the more it represents
of the goodness of the heart whence it issues,
the Divine Goodness which imprints the world
to proceed by all Its paths
to lift you up again; was content
nor between the last night and the first day
so lofty and so magnificent a procedure
either by one or by the other has there been or will there be;
for God was more liberal in giving Himself
to make man sufficient to lift himself up again,
than if only of Himself He had pardoned him.
And all the other modes were scanty
in respect to justice, if the Son of God
had not humbled himself to become incarnate.
Now to fill completely every desire of thine,
I return to a certain place to clear it up,
in order that thou mayest see there even, as I do.
Thou sayest, 'I see the water, I see the fire,
the air; and the earth, and all their mixtures
come to corruption, and endure short while,
and yet these things were created;
so that, if what I have said has been true,
they ought to be secure against corruption.
The Angels, brother, and the sincere country
in which thou art, may be called created,
even as they are, in their entire being;
but the elements which thou hast named,
and those things which are made of them,
are informed by a created power.
The matter of which they consist was created;
the informing power was created
in these stars which go round about them.
the soul of every brute and of the plants;
draw out from its potential elements
The ray and the motion of the holy lights
but inspires your life without intermediary,
the Supreme Benignity and enamors it
of Itself so that ever after it desires It.
And hence thou canst argue further
your resurrection, if thou refleetest
bow the human flesh was made when
the first parents were both made.”
