The world in its peril was wont to believe that the beautiful Cypriote revolving in the third epicycle rayed out mad love;
wherefore the ancient people in their ancient error not only unto her did honor with sacrifice and with votive cry,
but they honored Dione also and Cupid, the one as her mother, the other as her son, and they said that he had sat in Dido's lap
And from her, from whom I take my beginning, they took the name of the star which the sun wooes, now at her back now at her front.
I was not aware of the ascent to it; but of being in it, my Lady, whom I saw become more beautiful, gave me full assurance.
And even as in a flame a spark is seen, and as voice from voice is distinguished when one is steady and the other goes and returns,
I saw in that light other lamps moving in a circle more and less rapidly, in the measure, I believe, of their inward vision.
From a cold cloud winds never descended, or visible or not, go swift, that they would not seem impeded and slow
to him who had seen these divine lights coming to us, leaving the circling begun first among the high Seraphim.
And within those who appeared most in front was sounding HOSANNA, so that never since have I been without desire of hearing it again.
Then one came nearer to us, and alone began, “We all are ready to thy pleasure, that thou mayest joy in us.
With one circle, with one circling, and with one thirst, we revolve with the celestial Princes, to whom thou in the world once said:
'Ye who intelligent move the third heaven;' and we are so full of love that, to please thee, a little quiet will not be less sweet to us.”
After my eyes had offered themselves reverently to my Lady, and she had of herself made them contented and assured,
they turned again to the light which had promised so much; and, “Tell who ye are,” was my utterance, stamped with great affection.
And how much greater alike in quantity and quality did I see it become, through the new gladness which was added to its gladnesses when I spoke!
Become thus, it said to me, “The world had me below short while; and had it been longer much evil had not been which will be.
My joy which rays around me, and hides me like a creature swathed in its own silk, holds me concealed from thee.
Much didst thou love me, and thou hadst good reason; for had I stayed below I had showed thee of my love far more than the leaves.
That left bank which is bathed by the Rhone, after it has mingled with the Sorgue, awaited me in due time for its lord;
and that born of Ansonia which is towned with Bari, with Gaeta, and with Catona, whence the Tronto and the Verde disgorge into the sea.
Already was shining on my brow the crown of that land which the Danube waters after it abandons its German banks;
and the fair Trinacria (which is darkened, on the gulf between Pachynus and Pelorus which receives greatest annoy from Eurus)
not by Typhoeus but by nascent sulphur, would be still awaiting its kings descended through me from Charles and Rudolph,
if evil rule, which always embitters the subject people, had not moved Palermo to shout, 'Die! Die!'
And if my brother had taken note of this, he would already put to flight the greedy poverty of Catalonia, in order that it might not do him harm:
for truly there is need for him or for some other to look to it, so that on his laden bark more load be not put.
His own nature, which descended niggardly from a liberal one, would have need of such a soldiery as should not care to put into a chest.”
“Because I believe that the deep joy which thy speech, my lord, infuses in me is seen by thee there where every good ends and begins
even as I see it in myself, it is the more grateful to me; and this also I hold dear, that thou discernest it, gazing upon God.
Thou hast made me glad; and in like wise do thou make clear to me (since in speaking thou bast moved me to doubt) how bitter can issue from sweet seed.”
This I to him; and he to me, “If I am able to show to thee a truth, thou wilt hold thy face to that which thou askest, as thou dost hold thy back.
The Good which turns and contents all the realm which thou ascendest, makes its providence to be a power in these great bodies.
And not the natures only are foreseen in the Mind which by itself is perfect, but they together with their salvation.
For whatsoever this bow shoots falls disposed to its foreseen end, even as a thing directed to its aim.
Were this not so, the heavens through which thou journeyest would produce their effects in such wise that they would not be works of art but ruins;
and that cannot be, if the Intelligences which move these stars are not defective, and defective also the prime Intelligence which has not made them perfect.
Dost thou wish that this truth be made still clearer to thee?” And I, “No, truly; because I see it to be impossible that Nature should weary in that which is needful.”
Whereupon he again, “Now say, would it be worse for man on earth if he were not a citizen?” “Yes,” answered I, “and here I ask not the reason.”
“And can he be so, unless he live there below in divers manner through divers offices? No; if your master writes well of this.”
So he went on deducing far as here; then he concluded, “Hence it behoves that the roots of your works must be diverse.
Wherefore one is born Solon, and another Xerxes, another Melchisedech, and another he who, flying through the air, lost his son.
The revolving nature, which is the seal of the mortal wax, performs its art well, but does not distinguish one inn from another.
Hence it happens that Esau differs in seed from Jacob, and Quirinus comes from so mean a father that he is ascribed to Mars.
The generated nature would always make its path like its progenitors, if the divine foresight did not conquer.
Now that which was behind thee is before thee, but that thou mayest know that I have joy in thee, I wish that thou cloak thee with a corollary.
Nature, if she find fortune discordant with herself, like every other seed out of its region, always makes bad result.
And if the world down there would fix attention on the foundation which nature lays, following that, it would have its people good.
But ye wrest to religion one who shall be born to gird on the sword, and ye make a king of one who is for preaching;
wherefore your track is out of the road.”
