Looking upon His Son with the Love
which the one and the other eternally breathe forth,
the Primal and Ineffable Power
everything which revolves through the mind or through space
made with such order that cannot be
he who contemplates it without taste of Him.
Lift then thy sight, Reader, to the lofty wheels,
with me, straight to that region
where the one motion strikes on the other;
and there begin to gaze with delight on the art
of that Master who within Himself so loves it
that His eye never departs from it
See how from that point branches off,
the oblique circle which bears the planets,
to satisfy the world which calls on them;
and if their road had not been bent,
much virtue in the heavens would be in vain,
and well-nigh every potency dead here below.
And if from the straight line more or less distant
had been its departure, much would be defective
both below and above, of the order of the world.
Now do thou remain, Reader, upon thy bench,
following in thought that which is fore. tasted,
if thou wouldst be glad far sooner than weary.
I have set before thee; henceforth feed thee by thyself,
for unto itself wrests all my care
that theme whereof I have been made scribe.
The greatest minister of nature,
which imprints the world with the power of the heavens,
and with its light measures the time for us,
with that region called to mind above,
in conjunction, was circling through the spirals
in which from day to day he earlier presents himself.
And I was with him; but of the ascent
I was not aware, otherwise than as a man is aware,
before his first thought, of its coming.
Beatrice is she who thus conducts
from good to better so swiftly
that her act extends not through time.
How lucent of itself must that have been
which, within the sun where I entered,
was appareiit not by color but by light!
Though I should call on genius, art, and use,
I could not tell it so that it could ever be imagined;
but it may be believed, and sight of it longed for.
And if our fancies are low
for such loftiness, it is no marvel,
for beyond the sun was never eye could go.
Such was here the fourth family
of the High Father, who always satisfies it,
showing how He breathes forth, and how He begets.
And Beatrice began, “Thank,
thank thou the Sun of the Angels, who to this
visible one has raised thee by His grace.”
Heart of mortal was never so disposed
to devotion, and to give itself to God,
so ready, with its own entire pleasure,
as I became at those words;
and all my love was so set on Him
that Beatrice was eclipsed in oblivion.
It displeased her not; but she so smiled thereat
that the splendor of her smiling eyes
divided upon many things my singly intent mind.
I saw many living and surpassing effulgences
make a centre of us, and make a crown of themselves,
more sweet in voice than shining in aspect.
Thus girt the daughter of Latona,
we sometimes see, when the air is pregnant,
so that it holds the thread which makes the girdle.
In the court of Heaven, wherefrom I return,
are found many jewels so precious and beautiful
that they cannot be brought from the kingdom,
and of these was the song of those lights.
Who wings not himself so that he may fly up thither,
let him await the tidings thence from the dumb.
After those burning suns, thus singing,
had circled three times round about us,
like stars near fixed poles,
they seemed to me as ladies not loosed from a dance,
but who stop silent, listening
till they have caught the new notes.
And within one I heard begin, “Since
the ray of grace, whereby true love is kindled,
and which thereafter grows multiplied in loving,
so shines on thee
that it conducts thee upward by that stair
upon which, without reascending, no one descends,
he who should deny to thee the wine of his flask
for thy thirst, would not be more at liberty
than water which descends not to the sea.
Thou wishest to know with what plants this garland is enflowered,
which, round about her, gazes with delight upon the
beautiful Lady who strengthens thee for heaven.
I was of the lambs of the holy flock
which Dominic leads along the way
where one fattens well if he stray not.
This one who is nearest to me on the right
was my brother and master; and he was Albert
of Cologne, and I Thomas of Aquino.
If thus of all the rest thou wishest to be informed,
come, following my speech, with thy sight
circling around upon the blessed chaplet.
That next flaming issues from the smile
of Gratian, who one court and the other
so assisted that it pleases in Paradise.
The next, who at his side adorns our choir,
was that Peter who, like the poor woman,
offered his treasure to Holy Church.
The fifth light, which is most beautiful among us,
breathes from such love, that all the world
there below is greedy to know tidings of it.
Within it is the lofty mind, wherein wisdom so profound
was put, that, if the truth is true,
to see so much no second has arisen.
At his side thou seest the light of that candle,
which, below in the flesh, saw most inwardly
the angelic nature, and its ministry.
In the next little light smiles
that advocate of the Christian times,
with whose discourse Augustine provided himself.
Now if thou leadest the eye of the mind,
following my praises, from light to light,
thou remainest already thirsting for the eighth.
Therewithin, through seeing every good, rejoices
the holy soul which the deceit of the world
makes manifest to whoso hears him well.
The body whence it was hunted out lies
below in Cieldauro, and from martyrdom
and from exile it came unto this peace.
Beyond thou seest flaming the burning breath
of Isidore, of Bede, and of Richard
who in contemplation was more than man.
The one from whom thy look returns to me
is the light of a spirit to whom in grave thoughts
death seemed to come slow.
It is the eternal light of Sigier,
who reading in the Street of Straw
syllogized truths which were hated.”
Then, as a horologe which calls us
at the hour when the Bride of God rises
to sing matins to her Bridegroom that he may love her,
in which the one part draws and urges the other,
sounding ting! ting! with such sweet note
that the well-disposed spirit swells with love,
so saw I the glorious wheel
move, and render voice to voice in concord
and in sweetness which cannot be known
save there where joy becomes eternal.
