O insensate care of mortals,
how defective are those syllogisms
which make thee downward beat thy wings!
One was going after the Laws, and one after the Aphorisms,
and one following the priesthood,
and one to reign by force or by sophisms,
and one to rob, and one to civic business;
one, involved in pleasure of the flesh,
was wearying himself, and one was giving himself to idleness,
when I, loosed from all these things,
with Beatrice, was on high in Heaven
thus gloriously received.
When each had returned unto that
point of the circle at which it was at first,
it stayed, as a candle in a candlestick.
And I heard within that light
which first had spoken to me, as smiling
it began, making itself more clear,
Even as I am resplendent with its radiance,
so, looking into the Eternal Light,
I apprehend whence thou drawest the occasion of thy thoughts.
Thou art perplexed, and hast the wish
that my speech be bolted again in language so open and so plain
that it may be level to thy sense,
where just now I said, 'where well one fattens,'
and there where I said, 'the second has not been born;'
and here is need that one distinguish well.
“The Providence which governs the world
with that counsel, in which every created vision
is vanquished ere it reach the depth,
in order that might go toward her beloved,
the bride of Him, who with loud cries
espoused her with His blessed blood,
secure in herself and also more faithful to Him,
ordained two princes in her favor,
who on this side and that should be to her for guides.
The one was all seraphic in ardor,
the other, through wisdom, on earth was
a splendor of cherubic light.
Of the one I will speak, because both are
spoken of in praising one, whichever be taken,
for unto one end were their works.
Between the Tupino and the water which descends
from the hill chosen by the blessed Ubaldo,
hangs the fertile slope of a high mountain,
wherefrom Perugia feeleth cold and heat,
at Porta Sole, while behind it
Nocera and Gualdo weep because of their heavy yoke.
On that slope, where it most breaks
its steepness, rose a Sun upon the world,
as this one sometimes does from the Ganges.
Therefore let him who talks of that place
not say Ascesi, for he would speak short,
but Orient, if be would speak properly.
He was not yet very far from his rising,
when he began to make the earth feel
some comfort from his great virtue.
For, still a youth, he ran to strife for a lady such as
with his father unto whom, even as unto death,
no one unlocks the gate of pleasure;
and before his spiritual court
et coram patre to her he had himself united;
thereafter from day to day he loved her more ardently.
She, deprived of her first husband,
for one thousand and one hundred years and more, despised and obscure,
had stood without wooing till he came;
nor had it availed to hear, that found her secure
with Amyclas at the sound of his voice
he, who caused fear to all the world,
nor had it availed to have been constant and bold,
so that where Mary remained below,
she wept with Christ upon the cross.
But that I may not proceed too obscurely,
Francis and Poverty for these lovers
take henceforth in my diffuse speech.
Their concord and their glad semblances
love, and wonder, and sweet regard
made to be the cause of holy thoughts;
so that the venerable Bernard
first bared his feet, and following such great peace
ran, and, running, it seemed to him that he was slow.
Oh unknown riches! oh fertile good!
Egidius bares his feet and Sylvester bares his feet,
following the bridegroom; so pleasing is the bride.
Then that father and that master goes on his way
with his lady, and with that family
which the humble cord was now girding.
Nor did baseness of heart weigh down his brow
at being son of Pietro Bernardone,
nor at appearing marvellously despised;
but royally his bard intention
he opened to Innocent, and received from bim
the first seal for his Order.
After the poor people had increased
behind him, whose marvellous life
would be better sung in glory of the heavens,
adorned with a second crown
was by the Eternal Spirit, through Honorius.
the holy purpose of this archimandrite
And when, through thirst for martyrdom,
in the proud presence of the Sultan,
he had preached Christ and the rest who followed him
and because he found unripe for conversion,
the people too and in order not to stay in vain,
had returned to the fruit of the Italian grass,
on the rude rock, between the Tiber and the Arno,
he took from Christ the last seal,
which his limbs bore for two years.
When it pleased Him, who had allotted him to such great good,
to draw him up to the reward
which he had gained in making himself abject,
to his brethren as to rightful heirs,
he commended his most dear lady
and commanded them to love her faithfully;
and from her lap, his illustrious soul
willed to depart, returning to its realm,
and for his body he willed no other bier.
Think now of what sort was he, who was a worthy
colleague to keep the bark
of Peter on the deep sea to its right aim;
and this was our Patriarch:
wherefore whoever follows him as he commands
thou canst see that loads good merchandise.
But his flock of strange food
has become so greedy that. it cannot but be
scattered over diverse meadows;
and as his sheep, remote and vagabond,
go farther from him,
the emptier of milk they return to the fold.
Truly there are some of them who fear the harm,
and keep close to the shepherd; but they are so few
that little cloth suffices for their cowls.
Now if my words are not obscure,
if thy hearing has been attentive,
if thou recallest to mind that which I have said,
thy wish will be content in part,
because thou wilt see the plant wherefrom they are hewn,
and thou wilt see how the wearer of the thong reasons—
'Where well one fattens if one does not stray.'
