Soon as the last word of its speech
the blessed flame uttered
the holy mill-stone began to rotate,
and had not wholly turned in its gyration
before another enclosed it with a circle,
and matched motion with motion, song with song;
song which so surpasses our Muses,
our Sirens, in those sweet pipes,
as a primal splendor that which it reflects.
As are turned across a thin cloud
two bows parallel and of like colors
when Juno gives the order to her handmaid
the outer one born of that within,
after the manner of the speech of that wandering one
whom love consumed, as the sun does vapors,
and make the people here presageful,
because of the covenant which God established with Noah
concerning the world, that it is nevermore to be flooded;
of those sempiternal roses
so the two garlands turned around us,
and so the outer responded to the inner.
After the dance and the other great festivity,
alike of the singing and of the flaming,
light with light joyous and courteous,
had become quiet together at an instant and with one will
(just as the eyes which to the pleasure that moves them,
must needs together close and open)
from the heart of one of the new lights
a voice proceeded, which made me seem as the needle to the star
in turning me to its place
and it began, “The love which makes me beautiful
draws me to speak of the other leader
by whom so well has been spoken here of mine.
It is fit that where one is the other be led in,
so that as they served in war with one another,
together likewise may their glory shine.
The army of Christ, which it had cost so dear
to arm afresh, behind the standard,
was moving slow, mistrustful, and scattered,
when the Emperor who forever reigns
provided for the soldiery that was in peril,
through grace alone, not because it was worthy,
and, as has been said, succored his Bride
with two champions, by whose deed, by whose word,
the people gone astray were rallied.
In that region where the sweet west wind rises to open
the new leaves
wherewith Europe is seen to reclothe herself,
not very far from the beating of the waves
behind which, over their long course,
the sun sometimes bides himself to all men,
sits the fortunate Callaroga,
under the protection of the great shield
on which the Lion is subject and subjugates.
Therein was born the amorous lover
of the Christian faith, the holy athlete,
benignant to his own, and to his enemies harsh.
And when it was created, his mind was so replete
with living virtue,
that in his mother it made her a prophetess.
After the espousals were completed
between him and the faith at the sacred font,
where they dowered each other with mutual safety,
the lady who gave the assent for him
saw in a dream the marvellous fruit
which was to proceed from him and from his heirs;
and in order that he might be spoken of as he was,
a spirit went forth from here to name him
with the possessive of Him whose he wholly was.
Dominic he was called; and I speak of him
as of the husbandman whom Christ
elected to his garden to assist him.
Truly he seemed the messenger and familiar of Christ;
for the first love that was manifest in him
was for the first counsel that Christ gave.
Oftentimes was he silent and awake,
found by his nurse upon the ground,
as though he said, 'I am come for this.'
O father of him truly Felix!
Omother of him truly Joan,
if this, being interpreted, means as is said!
Not for the world, for which men now toil,
following him of Ostia and Thaddeus,
but for the love of the true manna,
be became in short time a great teacher,
such that he set himself to go about the vineyard,
which quickly fades if the vinedresser is bad;
and of the Seat which was formerly benign
more unto the righteous poor (not through itself
but through him who sits there and degenerates),
he asked not to dispense or two or three for six,
not the fortune of the first vacancy,
non decimas, quae sunt pauperum Dei,
but against the errant world
leave to fight for that seed
of which four and twenty plants are girding thee.
Then with doctrine and with will, together
with the apostolic office, he went forth
like a torrent which a lofty vein pours out,
and on the heretical stocks smote
his onset with most vigor there
where the resistance was the greatest.
From him proceeded thereafter divers streams
wherewith the catholic garden is watered,
so that its bushes stand more living.
If such was one wheel of the chariot
on which the Holy Church defended itself
and vanquished in the field its civil strife,
surely should be very plain to thee,
the excellence of the other, concerning which Thomas
before my coming was so courteous.
But the track which the highest part
of its circumference made is derelict;
So that the mould is where the crust was.
His household, which set forth straight
with their feet upon his footprints, are so turned round,
that they set the forward foot on that behind;
and soon the quality of the barvest shall be seen,
of this bad culture, when the tare
will complain that the chest is taken from it.
Yet I say, he who should search leaf by leaf
our volume, might still find a page
where he would read, 'I am that which I am wont:'
but it will not be from Casale nor from Acquasparta,
whence such come unto the Written Rule
that one flies from it, and the other contracts it.
“I am the life of Bonaventura
of Bagnoregio, who in great offices
always set sinister care behind me.
Illuminato and Augustin are here,
who were among the first barefoot poor
that in the cord made themselves friends to God.
Hugh of St. Victor is here with them,
and Peter Mangiadore, and Peter of Spain,
who down below shines in twelve books;
Nathan the prophet, and the Metropolitan
Chrysostom, and Anselm, and that Donatus
who deigned to set his hand to the first art;
Raban is here, and at my side shines
the Calabrian abbot Joachim
endowed with prophetic spirit.
to celebrate so great a paladin;
“The flaming courtesy moved me
of Brother Thomas, and his discreet discourse,
and with me moved this company.”
