Let him imagine, who desires to understand well that which I now saw (and let him retain the image like a firm rock, while I am speaking),
fifteen stars which in different regions vivify the heaven with brightness so great that it overcomes all thickness of the air;
let him imagine that Wain for which the bosom of our heaven suffices both night and day, so that in the turning of its pole it disappears not;
let him imagine the mouth of that horn which begins at the point of the axle on which the primal wheel goes round,—
to have made of themselves two signs in the heavens, like that which the daughter of Minos made, when she felt the frost of death,
and one to have its rays within the other, and both to revolve in such manner that one should go first and the other after;
and he will have as it were the shadow of the true constellation, and of the double dance, which was circling the point where I was;
because it is as much beyond our wont as the motion of the heaven which outspeeds all the rest is swifter than the movement of the Chiana.
There was sung riot Bacchus, not Paean, but three Persons in a divine nature, and it and the human in one Person.
The singing and the revolving completed each its measure, and those holy lights gave attention to us, making themselves happy from care to care.
Then the light in which the marvellous life of the poor man of God had been narrated to me broke the silence among those concordant deities, and said,
“Since one straw is threshed, since its seed is now garnered, sweet love invites me to beat out the other.
Thou believest that in the breast, wherefrom the rib was drawn to form the beautiful cheek whose taste costs dear to all the world,
and in that which, pierced. by the lance, both after and before made such satisfaction that it overcomes the balance of all sin,
whatever of light it is allowed to human nature to have was all infused. by that Power which made one and the other;
and therefore thou wonderest at that which I said above, when I told that the good which in the fifth light is inclosed had no second.
Now open thine eyes to that which I answer to thee, and thou wilt see thy belief and my speech become in the truth as the centre in a circle.
That which dies not and that which can die are naught but the splendor of that idea which in His love our Lord God brings to birth;
for that living Light which so proceeds from its Lucent Source that It is not disunited from It, nor from the Love which with them is intrined,
through Its own bounty collects Its radiance, as it were mirrored, in nine subsistences, Itself eternally remaining one.
Thence It descends to the ultimate potentialities, downward from act to act, becoming such that finally It makes naught save brief contingencies:
and these contingencies I understand. to be the generated things which the heavens in their motion produce with seed and without.
The wax of these, and that which moulds it, are not of one mode, and therefore under the ideal stamp it shines now more now less;
whence it comes to pass that one same plant in respect to species bears better or worse fruit, and that ye are born with diverse dispositions.
If the wax were exactly worked, and the heavens were supreme in their power, the whole light of the seal would be apparent.
But nature always gives it defective, working like the artist who has the practice of his art and a hand that trembles.
Nevertheless if the fervent Love disposes and imprints the clear Light of the primal Power, complete perfection is acquired here.
Thus of old the earth was made worthy of the complete perfection of the living being; thus was the Virgin made impregnate;
so that I commend thy opinion that human nature never was, nor will be, what it was in those two persons.
“Now, if I should not proceed further, 'Then how was this man without peer?' would thy words begin.
But, in order that that which is not apparent may clearly appear, consider who he was, and the occasion which moved him to request, when it was said to him, 'Ask.'
I have not so spoken that thou canst not clearly see that he was a king, who asked for wisdom, in order that he might be a worthy king;
not to know the number of the motors here on high, or if necesse with a contingent ever made necesse;
non si est dare primum motum esse, or if in the semicircle a triangle can be made so that it should not have one right angle.
Wherefore if thou notest this and what I said, a kingly prudence is that peerless seeing, on which the arrow of ray intention strikes.
And if thou directest clear eyes to the 'has arisen' thou wilt see it has respect only to kings, who are many, and the good are few.
With this distinction take thou my saying, and thus it can stand with that which thou believest of the first father, and of our Delight.
And let this be ever as lead to thy feet, to make thee move slow as a weary man, both to the YES and to the NO which thou seest not;
for he is very low among the fools who affirms or denies without distinction, alike in the one and in the other case:
because it happens, that oftentimes the current opinion bends in false direction, and then the inclination binds the understanding.
Far more than vainly does he leave the bank, since he returns not such as be sets out, who fishes for the truth, and has not the art;
and of this are manifest proofs to the world Parmenides, Melissus, Bryson, and many others who went on and knew not whither.
So did Sabellius, and Arius, and those fools who were as swords unto the Scriptures in making their straight faces crooked.
Let not the people still be too secure in judgment, like him who reckons up the blades in the field ere they are ripe.
For I have seen the briar first show itself stiff and wild all winter long, then bear the rose upon its top.
And I have seen a bark ere now ran straight and swift across the sea through all its course, to perish at last at entrance of the harbor.
Let not dame Bertha and master Martin, seeing one rob, and another make offering, believe to see them within the Divine counsel:
for the one may rise and the other may fall.”
