From the centre to the rim, and so from the rim to the centre,
the water in a round vessel moves,
according as it is struck from without or within.
fell suddenly into my mind
This which I say, when
the glorious life of Thomas became silent,
because of the similitude which was born
of his speech and that of Beatrice,
whom after him it pleased thus to begin,
This man has need, and he tells it not to you,
neither with his voice nor as yet in thought,
of going to the root of another truth.
Tell him if the light wherewith
your substance blossoms will remain with you
eternally even as it is now;
and if it remain, tell how, after
you shall be again made visible,
it will be possible that it hurt not your sight.”
As, when urged and drawn by greater pleasure,
those who are dancing in a ring with one accord
lift their voice and gladden their motions,
so, at that prompt and devout petition,
the holy circles showed new joy
in their turning and in their marvellous melody.
Whoso laments because man dies here
in order to live thereabove, has not seen here
the refreshment of the eternal rain
That One and Two and Three which ever lives,
and ever reigns in Three and Two and One,
uncircumscribed, and circumscribing everything,
was thrice sung by each
of those spirits with such a melody
that for every merit it would be a just reward
And I heard in the divinest light
of the small circle a modest voice,
perhaps such as was that of the Angel to Mary, make answer,
“As long as the festival
of Paradise shall be, so long will our love
radiate around us such a garment.
Its brightness follows our ardor,
the ardor our vision, and that is great
in proportion as it receives of grace above its own worth.
When the glorious and sanctified flesh
shall be put on us again, our persons
will be more pleasing through being all complete;
wherefore whatever gives us will be increased,
of gratuitous light the Supreme Good
light which enables us to see him;
so that our vision needs must increase,
our ardor increase which by that is kindled,
our radiance increase which comes from this.
But even as a coal which gives forth flame,
and by a vivid glow surpasses it,
so that it defends its own aspect,
thus this effulgence, which already encircles us,
will be vanquished in appearance by the flesh
which all this while the earth covers.
Nor will so great a light be able to fatigue us,
for the organs of the body will be strong
for everything which shall have power to delight us.”
So sudden and ready seemed to me
both one and the other choir in saying “Amen,”
that truly they showed desire for their dead bodies,
perhaps not only for themselves, but also for their mothers,
for their fathers, and for the others who were dear
before they became sempiternal flames.
And lo! round about, of a uniform brightness,
arose a lustre, outside that which was there,
like an horizon which is growing bright.
And even as at rise of early evening
new appearances begin in the heavens,
so that the sight seems and seems not true,
it seemed to me that there new subsistences
I began to see, and a circle forming
outside the other two circumferences.
O true sparkling of the Holy Spirit,
how sudden and glowing it became
to mine eyes, which, vanquished, endured it not!
But Beatrice, so beautiful and smiling,
showed herself to me, that among those sights
which have not followed my memory she must be left.
Thence my eyes regained power
to raise themselves again, and I saw myself transferred
alone with my Lady to higher salvation.
That I was more uplifted I perceived clearly
by the fiery smile of the star,
which seemed to me ruddier than its wont.
With all my heart and with that speech
which is one in all men, I made to God a holocaust
such as was befitting to the new grace;
and was not yet exhausted in my breast
the ardor of the sacrifice when I knew
that offering had been accepted and propitious;
for with such great glow and such great ruddiness
splendors appeared to me within two rays,
that I said, “O Helios, who dost so array them!”
Even as, marked out by less and greater lights,
the Galaxy so whitens between the poles of the world
that it indeed makes the wise to doubt,
thus, constellated in the depth of
Mars, those rays made the venerable sign
which joinings of quadrants in a circle make.
Here my memory overcomes my genius,
for that Cross was flashing forth Christ,
so that I know not to find worthy comparison.
But be who takes his cross and follows Christ
will yet excuse me for that which I omit,
when in that brightness he beholds Christ gleaming.
From horn to horn and between the top and the base
lights were moving, brightly scintillating
as they met together and in their passing by.
Thus here are seen, straight and athwart,
swift and slow, changing appearance,
the atoms of bodies, long and short,
moving through the sunbeam, wherewith sometimes the shade is striped
which for their protection
people contrive with skill and art
And as a viol or harp, strung in harmony
of many strings, makes a sweet tinkling
to one by whom the tune is not caught,
thus from the lights which there appeared to me
a melody was gathered through the Cross,
which rapt me without understanding of the hymn.
Truly was I aware that it was of holy praise,
because there came to me “Arise and conquer!”
as unto one who understands not, and yet bears.
I was so enamoured therewith
that until then had not been anything
which had fettered me with such sweet bonds
Perchance my word appears too daring,
in setting lower the pleasure from the beautiful eyes,
gazing into which my desire has repose.
But he who considers that the living seals
of every beauty have more effect the higher they are,
and that I there had not turned round to those eyes,
can excuse me for that whereof I accuse myself
in order to excuse myself, and see that I speak truth;
for the holy pleasure is not here excluded,
because it becomes the purer as it mounts.
