A benign will, wherein
the love which righteously inspires always manifests itself,
as cupidity does in the evil will,
imposed silence on that sweet lyre,
and quieted the holy strings
which the right hand of heaven slackens and draws tight.
How shall those substances be deaf unto just petitions
who, in order to give me wish
to pray unto them, were concordant in silence?
Well is it that be endlessly should grieve
who, for the love of thing which endures not
eternally, despoils him of that love.
As, through the tranquil and pure evening skies,
a sudden fire shoots from time to time,
moving the eyes which were at rest,
and seems to be a star which changes place,
except that from the region where it is kindled
nothing is lost, and it lasts short while,
so, from the arm which extends on the right,
to the foot of that Cross, ran a star
of the constellation which is resplendent there.
Nor did the gem depart from its ribbon,
but it ran along through the radial strip
and seemed like fire behind alabaster.
Thus did the pious shade of Anchises advance
(if our greatest Muse merits belief),
when in Elysium he perceived. his son.
“O sanguis meus! o superinfusa
gratia Dei! sicut tibi, cui
bis unquam coeli janua reclusa?”
Thus that light; whereat I gave heed to it;
then I turned my sight to my Lady,
and on this side and that I was wonderstruck;
for within her eyes was glowing a smile,
such that with my own I thought to touch the depth
of my grace and of my Paradise.
Then, gladsome to hear and to see,
the spirit joined things to his beginning
which I understood not, he spoke so profoundly.
Nor did he hide himself to me by choice,
but by necessity, for his conception
was set above the mark of mortals.
And when the bow of his ardent affection
was so relaxed that his speech descended
towards the mark of our understanding,
the first thing that was understood by me
was, “Blessed be Thou, Trinal, and One
who in my offspring art so courteous.”
And he went on, “Grateful and long hunger,
derived from reading in the great vouime
where white or dark is never changed,
thou hast relieved, my son, within this light
in which I speak to thee, thanks to Her
who clothed thee with plumes for the lofty flight.
Thou believest that thy thought flows to me
from that which is first; even as
from the unit, if that be known, ray out the five and six.
And therefore who I am, and why I appear
to thee more joyous, thou askest me not,
than any other in this glad crowd.
Thou believest the truth; for the less and the great
of this life gaze upon the mirror
in which, before thou thinkest, thou dost display thy thought.
But in order that the sacred Love, in which I watch
with perpetual sight, and which makes me thirst
with sweet desire, may be fulfilled the better,
let thy voice, secure, bold, and glad,
utter the wish, utter the desire,
to which my answer is already decreed.”
I turned me to Beatrice, and she heard
before I spoke, and smiled to me a sign
which made the wings to my desire grow:
and I began thus: “the affection and the intelligence,
When the first Equality appeared to you,
became of one weight for each of you;
because the Sun which illumined and warmed you
is of such equality in its heat and in its light
that all similitudes are defective.
But will and discourse in mortals,
for the reason which is manifest to you,
are diversely feathered in their wings.
Wherefore I, who am mortal, feel myself in this
inequality, and therefore I give not thanks,
save with my heart, for thy paternal welcome.
Truly I beseech thee, living topaz
that dost ingem this precious jewel,
that thou make me content with thy name?”
“O leaf of mine, in whom, I took pleasure,
while only awaiting, I was thy root.”
Such a beginning he, answering, made to me.
Then he said to me: “He from whom
thy family is named, and who for a hundred years and more
has circled the mountain on the first ledge,
was my son and was thy great-grandsire.
Truly it behoves that his long fatigue
thou shorten for him with thy works.
Florence, within the ancient circle
wherefrom she still takes both tierce and nones,
was abiding in sober and modest peace.
She had not necklace nor coronal,
nor dames with ornamented shoes, nor girdle
which was more to be looked at than the person.
Not yet did at her birth cause fear
the daughter to the father, for the time and dowry
did not evade measure on this side and that.
She had not houses void of families;
Sardanapalus had not yet arrived there
to show what can be done in a chamber.
Not yet was Montemalo surpassed
by your Uccellatoio, which, as it has been surpassed
in its rise, shall be so in its fall.
I saw Bellineoin Berti go girt
with leather and bone, and his dame come from her mirror
without a painted face.
And I saw them of the Nerli, and them of the Vecchio,
contented with the uncovered skin,
and their dames with the spindle and the distaff.
O fortunate women! Every one was sure
of her burial place; and as yet no one
was deserted in her bed for France.
One over the cradle kept her careful watch,
and, comforting, she used the idiom
which first amuses fathers and mothers.
Another, drawing the tresses from her distaff,
told tales to her household
of the Trojans, and of Fiesole, and of Rome.
would then have been held as great a marvel
A Cianghella, a Lapo Salterello,
as Cincinnatus or Cornelia would be now.
To such a tranquil, to such a beautiful
life of citizens, to such a trusty
citizenship, to such a sweet inn,
Mary, called on with loud cries, gave me;
and in your ancient Baptistery
I became at once a Christian and Cacciaguida.
Moronto was my brother, and Eliseo;
my dame came to me from the valley of the Po,
and thence was thy surname.
Afterward I followed the emperor Conrad.
and he belted me of his soldiery,
so much by good deeds did I come into his favor.
Following him I went against the iniquity
of that law whose people usurp
your right, though fault of the shepherd.
There by that base folk was I
released from the deceitful world,
the love of which pollutes many souls,
and I came from martyrdom to this peace.”
