O thou small nobleness of our blood!
If thou makest folk glory in thee
down here, where our affection languishes,
it will nevermore be a marvel to me;
for there, where appetite is not perverted,
I mean in Heaven, I myself gloried in thee.
Truly art thou a cloak which quickly shortens,
so that, if day by day it be not pieced,
Time goeth round about it with his shears.
With the YOU, which Rome first tolerated,
in which her family least perseveres,
my words began again.
Whereat Beatrice, who was a little withdrawn,
smiling, seemed like her who coughed
at the first fault that is written of Guenever.
I began, “You are my father,
you give me all confidence to speak;
you lift me so that I am more than I.
Through so many streams is my mind filled with gladness
that it makes of itself a joy,
in that it can bear this and not burst.
Tell me then, beloved first source of me,
who were your ancestors, and what were the years
that were numbered in your boyhood.
Tell me of the sheepfold of St. John,
how large it was then, and who were the people
within it worthy of the highest seats.”
As a coal quickens at the blowing of the winds,
to flame, so I saw that light
become resplendent at my blandishments,
and as it became more beautiful to my eyes,
so with voice more dulcet and soft,
but not with this modern speech,
it said to me, “From that clay on which Ave was said,
unto the birth in which my mother, who. now is sainted,
was lightened of me with whom she was burdened, this fire had come to its Lion five hundred, fifty, and thirty times to reinflame itself beneath his paw. My ancestors and I were born in the place where the last ward is first found by him who runs in your annual game. Let it suffice to hear this of my elders. Who they were, and whence they came thither, it is more becoming to leave untold than to recount.
on the Lion's breast
like a ruddy shield
As he glow'd.—Maud, part III.
The Lion
is the sign Leo
in the Zodiac,
by supposed conformity of disposition
to Mars
appropriate
All those who at that time were there
able to bear arms between Mars and the Baptist,
were the fifth of them who are living.
But the citizenship, which is now mixed
with Campi and with Certaldo and with Figghine,
was to be seen pure in the lowest artisan.
Oh, how much better it would be
that those folk of whom I speak were neighbors, and at Galluzzo
and at Trespiano to have your confine,
than to have them within, and to endure the stench
of the churl of Aguglione, and of him of Signa,
who already has his eye sharp for barratry!
If the people which most degenerates in the world
had not been as a stepdame unto Caesar,
but like a mother benignant to her son,
there is one now a Florentine who changes money and traffics,
who would have returned to Simifonti,
there where his grandsire used to go begging.
Montemurlo would still belong to its Counts,
the Cerchi would be in the parish of Acone,
and perhaps the Buondelmonti in Valdigreve.
The confusion of persons has always been
the beginning of the harm of the city,
as in the body the food which is added.
And a blind bull falls more headlong
than the blind lamb; and oftentimes
one sword cuts more and better than five.
If thou regardest Luni and Urbisaglia,
how they have gone, and how
Chiusi and Sinigaglia are going their way after them,
to hear how families are undone
will not appear to thee a strange thing or a bard,
since cities have their term.
Your things all have their death,
even as ye; but it is concealed in some
that last long, while lives are short.
And as the revolution of the heaven of the Moon
covers and uncovers the shores without a pause,
so fortune does with Florence.
Wherefore should not appear to thee a marvellous thing
what I shall tell of the high Florentines,
whose fame is hidden by time,
I saw the Ughi, and I saw the Catellini,
Filippi, Greci, Ormanni, and Alberichi,
even in their decline, illustrious citizens;
and I saw, as great as they were old,
with those of the Sannella, those of the Area,
and Soldanieri, and Ardinghi, and Bostiebi.
Over the gate which at present is laden
with new felony of such weight
that soon there will be jettison from the bark,
were the Ravignani, from whom is descended
the Count Guido and whosoever
since has taken the name of the high Bellincione.
He of the Pressa knew already bow
one needs to rule, and Galigaio had
already in his house the gilded hilt and pummel.
Great were already the column of the Vair,
the Sacchetti, Giuochi, Fifanti, and Barucci,
and Galli, and they who blush for the bushel.
The stock from which the Calfucci sprang
was already great, and already
the Sizii. and Arrigucci had been drawn to curule chairs.
Oh how great did I see those who have been undone
by their pride! and the balls of gold
made Florence flourish with all their great deeds.
So did the fathers of those
who always,when your church is vacant,
become fat, staying in consistory.
The overweening race which is as a dragon
behind him who flies, and to him who shows tooth
or purse is gentle as a lamb,
already was coming up, but from small folk,
so that it pleased not Ubertin Donato
that his father-in-law should afterwards make him their relation.
Already had Caponsacco into the market place
descended down from Fiesole, and already was
Giuda a good citizen, and Infangato.
I will tell a thing incredible and true:
into the little circle one entered by a gate
which was named for those of the Pear.
Every one who bears the beautiful ensign
of the great baron whose name and whose praise
the feast of Thomas revives,
from him had knighthood and privilege;
although unites himself with the populace.
to-day he who binds it with a border
Already there were Gualterotti and Importuni;
and Borgo would now be more quiet,
if they had gone hung for new neighbors.
The house of which was born your weeping,
through its just indignation which has slain you,
and put an end to your glad living,
was honored, both itself and its consorts.
O Buondelmonte, how ill didst thou flee
its nuptials through the persuasions of another!
Many would be glad who now are sorrowful,
if God had conceded thee to the Ema
the first time that thou camest to the city.
But it behoved to that broken stone
which guards the bridge that Florence should offer a victim
in her last peace
With these families, and with others with them,
I saw Florence in such repose
that she had no occasion why she should weep.
With these families I saw her people so glorious
and so just, that the lily
was never set reversed upon the staff,
nor had it been made blood-red by division.
