Now was enjoying alone its own word,
that blessed mirror, and I was tasting
mine, tempering the bitter with the sweet.
and that Lady who to God was leading me
said, “Change thy thought; think that I am
near to Him who lifts the burden of every wrong.”
I turned me round at the loving sound
of my Comfort, and what I then saw
love in the holy eyes, I here leave it;
not only because I distrust my own speech,
but because of the memory which cannot return
so far above itself, unless another guide it.
Thus much of that moment can I recount,
that, again beholding her, my affection
was free from every other desire.
While the eternal pleasure, which was raying directly
upon Beatrice, from her fair face
was contenting me with its second aspect,
vanquishing me with the light of a smile,
she said to me, “Turn thee, and listen,
for not only in my eyes is Paradise.”
As sometimes here one sees
the affection in the countenance, if it be so great
that by it the whole soul is occupied,
so in the flaming of the holy effulgence
to which I turned me, I recognized the will
in it still to speak somewhat with me
It began, “In this fifth threshold
of the tree, which lives from its top,
and always bears fruit, and never loses leaf,
are blessed spirits, who below, before
they came to heaven, were of great renown,
so that every Muse would be rich with them.
Therefore gaze upon the arms of the Cross;
he, whom I shall name, will there do that
which within a cloud its own swift fire does.”
I saw a light drawn over the Cross;
At the naming of Joshua, even as he did it,
nor was the word noted by me before the act.
And at the name of the lofty Maccabeus
I saw another move revolving,
and gladness was the whip of the top.
Thus for Charlemagne and for Roland
my attentive gaze followed two of them,
as the eye follows its falcon as be flies.
Afterward William, and Renouard,
and the duke Godfrey drew my sight
over that Cross, and Robert Guiscard.
Then, moving, and mingling among the other lights,
the soul which had spoken with me showed me
how great an artist it was among the singers of heaven.
I turned me round to my right side
to see my duty in Beatrice
either by speech or by act, signified;
and I saw her eyes so clear,
so joyous, that her semblance
surpassed her other and her latest wont.
And even as, through feeling more delight
in doing good, a man from day to day
becomes aware that his virtue is advancing,
so I became aware that my circling round
together with the heaven had increased its are,
seeing that miracle more adorned.
And such as is the change, in brief passage
of time, in a pale lady, when her countenance
is unlading the load of bashfulness,
such was there in my eyes, when I had turned,
because of the whiteness of the temperate star
sixth which had received, me within itself.
I saw, within that torch of Jove,
the sparkling of the love which was there
shape out our speech to my eyes.
And as birds, risen from the river-bank,
as if rejoicing together over their food,
make of themselves a troop now round, now of some other shape,
so within the lights holy creatures
were singing as they flew, and made of themselves
now D, now I, now L, in their proper shapes.
First, singing, they moved to their melody,
then becoming one of these characters,
they stopped a little, and were silent.
O divine Pegasea, who makest the wits of men glorious,
and renderest them long-lived,
as they, through thee, illume the cities and the kingdoms,
me with thyself that I may set in relief
their shapes, as I have conceived them
I let thy power appear in these brief verses!
They showed themselves then in five times seven
vowels and consonants; and I noted
the parts as they seemed spoken to me.
Diligite justitiam were first
verb and noun of all the picture;
qui judicatis terram were the last.
Then in the M of the fifth word
they remained arranged, so that Jove
seemed silver patterned there with gold
And I saw other lights descending where
the top of the M was, and become quiet there,
singing, I believe, the Good which moves them to itself.
Then, as on the striking of burnt logs
rise innumerable sparks,
wherefrom the foolish are wont to draw auguries,
there seemed to rise again thence more than a thousand lights,
and mount, one much and one little,
according as the Sun which kindles them allotted them;
and, each having become quiet in its place,
I saw the head and the neck of an eagle
represented by that patterned fire.
He who paints there, has none who may guide Him,
but Himself guides, and by Him is inspired
that virtue which is form for the nests.
The rest of the blessed spirits, which content
seemed at first to be enlilied on the M,
with a slight motion followed out the imprint.
O sweet star, how great gems and how many
showed to me that our justice
is the effect of that heaven which thou ingemmest!
Wherefore I pray the Mind, in which
thy motion and thy virtue have their source, that It regard
whence issues the smoke which spoils thy radiance,
so that now a second time It may be wroth
at the buying and selling within the temple
which was walled with signs and martyrdoms
O soldiery of the Heaven on which I gaze,
pray ye for those who are on earth
all gone astray after the bad example!
Of old it was the wont to make war with swords,
but now it is made by taking, now here now there,
the bread which the piteous Father locks up from none.
But thou that writest only in order to cancel,
bethink thee that Peter and Paul, who died
for the vineyard which thou art laying waste, are still alive.
Thou mayest indeed say, “I have my desire set so
on him who willed to live alone,
and for a dance was dragged to martyrdom
that I know not the Fisherman nor Paul.”
