The beautiful image, which in its sweet fruition was making joyful the interwoven souls, appeared before me with outspread wings.
Each soul appeared a little ruby on which a ray of the sun glowed so enkindled that it reflected him into My eyes.
And that which it now behoves me to describe, no voice ever reported, nor ink wrote, nor was it ever conceived by the fancy;
for I saw, and also heard the beak speaking, and uttering with the voice both I and MY, when in conception it was WE and OUR.
And it began, “Through being just and pious am I here exalted to that glory which lets not itself be conquered by desire;
and on earth I left my memory such that the evil people there commend it, but continue not its story.”
Thus a single heat makes itself felt from many embers, even as from many loves a single sound issued from that image.
Wherefore I thereon, “O perpetual flowers of the eternal gladness, which make all your odors seem to me as only one,
deliver me, by your breath, from the great fast which has held me long in hunger, not finding for it any food on earth.
Well I know that if the Divine Justice makes any realm in heaven its mirror, yours does not apprehend it through a veil.
Ye know how intently I address myself to listen; ye know what is that doubt which is so old a fast to me.”
As a falcon which, issuing from his hood, moves his head, and claps his wings, showing desire, and making himself fine;
so I saw this ensign, which was woven of praise of the Divine Grace, become, with songs such as he knows who thereabove rejoices.
Then it began, “He who turned the compasses at the verge of the world, and distributed within it so much occult and manifest,
could not so imprint His Power on all the universe that His Word should not remain in infinite excess.
And this makes certain that the first proud one, who was the top of every creature, through not awaiting light, fell immature.
And hence it appears, that every lesser nature is a scant receptacle for that Good which has no end and measures Itself by Itself.
Wherefore our vision, which needs must be some ray of the Mind with which all things are full,
cannot in its own nature be so potent that it may not discern its origin to be far beyond that which is apparent to it.
Therefore the sight which your world receives penetrates into the eternal justice as the eye into the sea;
which, though from the shore it can see the bottom, on the ocean sees it not, and nevertheless it is there, but the depth conceals it.
There is no light but that which comes from the serene which is never clouded; nay, there is darkness, either shadow of the flesh, or its poison.
The hiding place is now open enough to thee, which concealed from thee the living Justice concerning which thou madest such frequent question;
for thou saidest,—'A man is born on the bank of the Indus, and no one is there who may speak of Christ, nor who may read, nor who may write;
and all his wishes and acts are good so far as human reason sees, without sin in life or in speech.
He dies unbaptized, and without faith: where is this Justice which condemns him? where is his sin if he does not believe?'
Now who art thou, that wouldst sit upon a bench to judge a thousand miles away with the short vision of a single span?
Assuredly, for him who subtilizes with me, if the Scripture were not above you, there would be occasion for doubting to a marvel.
Oh earthly animals! oh gross minds!
“The primal Will, which of Itself is good, never is moved from Itself, which is the Supreme Good. So much is just as is accordant to It;
no created good draws It to itself, but It, raying forth, is the cause of that good.”
As above her nest the stork circles, after she has fed her brood, and as he who has been fed looks up at her,
such became (and I so raised my brows) the blessed image, which moved its wings urged by so many counsels.
Wheeling it sang, and said, “As are my notes to thee who understandest them not, so is the eternal judgment to you mortals.”
After those shining flames of the Holy Spirit became quiet, still in the sign which made the Romans reverend to the world, it began again, “
To this kingdom no one ever ascended, who had not believed in Christ either before or after he was nailed to the tree.
But behold, many cry Christ, Christ, who, at the Judgment, shall be far less near to him, than such an one who knew not Christ;
and the Ethiop will condemn such Christians when the two companies shall be divided, the one forever rich, and the other poor.
What will the Persians be able to say to your kings, when they shall see that volume open in which are written all their dispraises?
There among the deeds of Albert shall be seen that which will soon set the pen in motion, by which the kingdom of Prague shall be made desert.
There shall be seen the woe which he who shall die by the blow of a wild boar is bringing upon the Seine by falsifying the coin.
There shall be seen the pride that quickens thirst, which makes the Scot and the Englishman mad, so that neither can keep within his own bounds.
The luxury shall be seen, and the effeminate living of him of Spain, and of him of Bohemia, who never knew valor, nor wished it.
The goodness of the Cripple of Jerusalem shall be seen marked with a I, while an M shall mark the contrary.
The avarice and the cowardice shall be seen of him who guards the island of the fire, where Anchises ended his long life;
and, to give to understand how little worth he is, the writing for him shall be in contracted letters which shall note much in small space.
And to every one shall be apparent the foul deeds of his uncle and of his brother who have dishonored so famous a nation and two crowns.
And he of Portugal, and he of Norway shall be known there; and he of Rascia, who, to his harm, has seen the coin of Venice.
O happy Hungary, if she allow herself no longer to be maltreated! and happy Navarre, if she would arm herself with the mountains which bind her round!
And every one must believe that now, for earnest of this, Nicosia and Famagosta are lamenting and complaining
because of their beast which departs not from the flank of the others.
