When he who illumines all the world,
descends from our hemisphere
so that the day on every side is spent,
the heavens which erst by him alone are enkindled,
suddenly become again conspicuous
with many lights, on which one is shining.
And this act of the heavens came to my mind
when the ensign of the world and of its leaders
became silent in its blessed beak;
because all those living lights,
far more shining, began songs
which lapse and fall from out my memory.
O sweet love, that cloakest thee with a smile,
how ardent didst thou appear in those pipes
which had the breath alone of holy thoughts!
After the precious and lucent stones,
wherewith I saw the sixth luminary ingemmed,
imposed silence on their angelic bells,
I seemed to hear the murmur of a stream
which falls pellucid down from rock to rock,
showing the abundance of its mountain source.
And as the sound at the cithern's neck,
takes its form, and in like manner at the vent
of the bagpipe the air which enters it,
thus, without pause of waiting,
that murmur of the Eagle rose up
through its neck, as if it were hollow.
There it became voice, and thence it issued
through its beak in form of words,
such as the heart whereon I wrote them was awaiting.
“The part in me which sees and endures the sun
in mortal eagles,” it began to me,
“must now be fixedly looked upon,
because of the fires whereof I make my shape,
those wherewith the eye in my head sparkles
are the highest of all their grades.
He who shineth in the middle, as the pupil,
was the singer of the Holy Spirit,
who bore about the ark from town to town.
Now he knows the merit of his song,
so far as it was the effect of his own counsel,
by the recompense which is equal to it.
Of the five which make a circle for the brow,
be who is nearest to my beak
consoled the poor widow for her son.
Now he knows how dear it costs
not to follow Christ, by the experience
of this sweet life and of the opposite.
And he who follows in the circumference
of which I speak, along the top of the are,
by true penitence postponed death.
Now he knows that the eternal judgment
is not altered, when worthy prayer
there below makes to-morrow's what is of to-day.
The next who follows, together with the laws and me,
under a good intention which bore bad fruit,
by ceding to the Pastor made himself Greek,
Now he knows how the ill derived
from his good action is not hurtful to him,
although thereby the world may be destroyed.
And he whom thou seest in the down-bent are,
was William, whom that land deplores
which weeps for Charles and Frederick living.
Now he knows how heaven is enamoured
of a just king, and even by the aspect
of his effulgence makes it seen.
Who, down in the erring world, would believe
that Rhipeus the Trojan in this circle
was the fifth of the holy lights?
Now he knows much of what the world
cannot see of the divine grace,
although his sight cannot discern its depth.”
Like as a little lark that in the air expatiates
first singing, and then is silent, content
with the last sweetness which satisfies her,
such seemed to me the image of the imprint
of the Eternal Plea, sure, according to whose desire
everything becomes that which it is.
And though I was, in respect to my doubt,
there, like glass to the color which cloaks it;
it endured not to await the time in silence,
but from my mouth, “What things are these?”
urged with the force of its own weight:
whereat I saw great festival of sparkling.
Thereupon, with its eye more enkindled,
the blessed ensign answered me ,
in order not to keep me in wondering suspense:
I see that thou believest these things
because I say them, but thou seest not how;
so that, although believed in, they are hidden.
Thou dost as one who a thing by name
fully apprehends, but its quiddity
cannot see unless another explain it.
Regnum coelorum suffers violence
from fervent love, and from a living hope
which vanquishes the divine will;
not in such wise as man overcomes man,
but vanquishes it, because it wills to be vanquished,
and, vanquished, vanquishes with its own benignity.
The first life of the eyebrow and the fifth
make thee marvel, because thou seest
the region of the Angels painted with them.
From their bodies they did not issue, as thou believest,
Gentiles, but Christians, in firm faith,
one in the Feet that were to suffer, one in the Feet that had suffered.
For the one from Hell, where there is never return
to righteous will, came back to his bones;
and that was the reward of living hope;
of living hope, which put its power
in prayers made to God to raise him up,
so that it might be possible his will should be moved.
The glorious soul, whereof I speak,
returning to the flesh, in which it remained short while,
believed in Him who was able to aid it;
and in believing was kindled to such fire
of true love, that at the second death
it was worthy to come to this sport.
The other, through grace which distils from a fount so deep
that creature never
pushed the eye far as its primal wave,
there below set all his love on righteousness;
wherefore from grace to grace God opened his
eye to our future redemption,
so that he believed in it, and
thenceforth endured no more the stench of paganism,
and reproved therefor the perverse folk.
those three ladies were to him for baptism
whom thou sawest at the right wheel
More than a thousand years before baptizing,
O predestination, how remote
is thy root from the sight of those
who see not the entire First Cause!
And ye, mortals, keep yourselves restrained
in judging; for we who see God,
know not yet all the elect.
And unto us such want is sweet,
for our good is perfected in this good,
that what God wills we also will.”
Thus, by that divine image,
to make my short sight clear,
sweet medicine was given to me.
And as a good lutanist
makes the vibration of the string accompany a good singer,
whereby the song acquires more pleasantness,
so it comes back to my mind while it spake,
that I saw the two blessed lights,
just as the winking of the eyes concords.
moving their flamelets to the words,
