Now were my eyes fixed again upon the countenance of my Lady, and my mind with them, and from every other intent it was withdrawn;
and she was not smiling, but, “If I should smile,” she began to me, “thou wouldst become such as Semele was when she became ashes;
for my beauty, which along the stairs of the eternal palace is kindled the more, as thou hast seen, the higher it ascends,
is so resplendent that, if it were not tempered, at its effulgence thy mortal power would be as a bough shattered by thunder.
We are lifted to the seventh splendor which beneath the breast of the burning Lion now radiates downward mingled with his strength.
Fix thy mind behind thine eyes, and make of them mirrors for the shape which in this mirror shall be apparent to thee.”
He who should know what was the pasture of my sight in her blessed aspect, when I transferred me to another care,
would recognize how pleasing it was to me to obey my celestial escort, by counterposing one side with the other.
Within the crystal which, circling round the world, bears the name of its shining leader, under whom all wickedness lay dead,
I saw, of the color of gold through which a sunbeam is shining, a stairway rising up so high that my eye followed it not.
I saw, moreover, so many splendors descending, along the steps, that I thought every light which appears in heaven was there diffused.
And as, according to their natural custom, the rooks, at the beginning of the day, move about together, in order to warm their cold feathers;
then some go away without return, others wheel round to whence they had set forth, and others, circling, make a stay;
such fashion it seemed to me was here in that sparkling which came together, so soon as it struck on a certain step;
and that which stopped nearest to us became so bright that I said in my thought, “I clearly see the love which thou signifiest to me.
But she, from whom I await the how and the when of speech and of silence, stays still; wherefore I, contrary to desire, do well that I ask not.”
Whereupon she, who saw my silence, in the sight of Him who sees everything, said to me, “Let loose thy warm desire.”
And I began, “My own merit makes me not worthy of thy answer; but for her sake who concedes to me the asking,
O blessed life, that keepest thyself hidden within thine own joy, make known to me the cause which has placed thee so near me;
and tell why in this wheel the sweet symphony of Paradise is silent, which below through the others so devoutly sounds.”
“Thou hast thy hearing mortal, as thy sight,” it replied to me; “therefore no song is here for the same reason that Beatrice has no smile.
Down along the steps of the holy stairway I have thus far descended, only to give thee glad welcome with my speech and with the light that mantles me;
nor has more love made me to be more ready, for as much and more love is burning here above, even as the flaming manifests to thee;
but the high charity, which makes us ready servants to the counsel that governs the world, allots here, even as thou observest.”
“I see well,” said I, “O sacred lamp, how the free will of love suffices in this Court for following the eternal Providence.
But this is what seems to me hard to discern, why thou alone wert predestined to this office among thy consorts.”
I had not come to the last word before the light made a centre of its middle, whirling like a swift milestone.
Then the love that was within it answered, “A divine light strikes upon me, penetrating through this wherein I embosom me:
the virtue of which, conjoined with my vision, lifts me above myself so far that I see the Supreme Essence from which it emanates.
Thence comes the joy wherewith I flame, because to my vision, in proportion as it is clear, I match the clearness of my flame.
But that soul in Heaven which is most enlightened, that Seraph who has his eye most fixed on God, could not satisfy thy demand;
because that which thou askest lies so deep within the abyss of the eternal statute, that from every created sight it is cut off.
And when thou retumest to the mortal world, carry this back, so that it may no more presume to move its feet toward such a goal.
The mind which shines here, on earth is smoky; wherefore consider how there below it can do that which it cannot do though Heaven assume it.”
So did its words prescribe to me, that I left the question, and drew me back to ask it humbly who it was.
“Between the two shores of Italy, and not very distant from thy native land, rise rocks so lofty that the thunders sound far lower down,
and they make a height which is called Catria, beneath which a hermitage is consecrated which is wont to be devoted to worship only.”
Thus it began again to me with its third speech, and then, continuing, it said, “Here in the service of God I became so steadfast,
that, with food of olive juice alone, lightly I used to pass the heats and frosts, content in contemplative thoughts.
That cloister was wont to render in abundance to these heavens; and now it is become so empty as needs must soon be revealed.
In that place I was Peter Damian, and Peter a sinner had I been in the house of Our Lady on the Adriatic shore.
Little of mortal life was remaining for me, when I was sought for and dragged to that hat which ever is passed down from bad to worse.
Cephas came, and the great vessel of the Holy Spirit came, lean and barefoot, taking the food of whatsoever inn.
Now the modern pastors require one to hold them up on this side and that, and one to lead them, so heavy are they, and one to support them behind.
They cover their palfreys with their mantles, so that two beasts go under one skin. O Patience, that endurest so much!”
At this voice I saw more flamelets from step to step descending and revolving, and each revolution made them more beautiful.
Round about this one they came, and stopped, and uttered a cry of such deep sound that here could be none like it,
nor did I understand it, the thunder so overcame me.
