Oppressed with amazement, I turned me to my Guide, like a little child who runs back always thither where he most confides.
And she, like a mother who quickly succors her pale and breathless son with her voice, which is wont to reassure him, said to me,
11 Knowest thou not, that thou art in Heaven? and knowest thou not that Heaven is all holy, and whatever is done here comes from good zeal?
How the song would have transformed thee, and I by smiling, thou canst now conceive, since the cry has moved thee so much;
in which, if thou hadst understood its prayers, already would be known to thee the vengeance which thou shalt see before thou diest.
The sword of here on high cuts not in haste, nor slow, save to the seeming of him who, desiring, or fearing, awaits it.
But turn thee round now toward the others, for many illustrious spirits thou shalt see, if, as I say, thou dost lead back thy look.”
As it pleased her I directed my eyes, and saw a hundred little spheres, which together were becoming more beautiful with mutual rays.
I was standing as one who within himself represses the point of his desire, and attempts not to ask, he so fears the too-much.
And the largest and the most luculent of those pearls came forward to make of its own accord my wish content.
Then within it I heard, “If thou couldst see, as I do, the charity which burns among us, thy thoughts would be expressed.
But that thou through waiting mayst not delay thy high end, I will make answer to thee, even to the thought concerning which thou art so regardful.
“That mountain on whose slope Cassino is, was of old frequented on its summit by the deluded and illdisposed people,
and I am be who first carried up thither the name of Him who brought to earth the truth which so high exalts us:
and such grace shone upon me that I drew away the surrounding villages from the impious worship which seduced the world.
These other fires were all contemplative men, kindled by that heat which brings to birth holy flowers and fruits.
Here is Macarius, here is Romuald, here are my brothers, who within the cloisters fixed their feet, and held a steadfast heart.”
And I to him, “The affection which thou displayest in speaking with me, and the good semblance which I see and note in all your ardors,
have so expanded my confidence as the sun does the rose, when she becomes open so much as she has power to be.
Therefore I pray thee, and do thou, father, assure me if I have power to receive so much grace, that I may see thee with uncovered shape.”
Whereon he, “Brother, thy high desire shall be fulfilled in the last sphere, where are fulfilled all others and my own.
There perfect, mature, and whole is every desire; in that alone is every part there where it always was:
for it is not in space, and hath not poles; and our stairway reaches up to it, wherefore thus from thy sight it conceals itself.
Far up as there the patriarch Jacob saw it stretch its topmost part when it appeared to him so laden with Angels.
But now no one lifts his feet from earth to ascend it; and my Rule is remaining as waste of paper.
The walls, which used to be an abbey, have become caves; and the cowls are sacks full of bad meal.
But heavy usury is not gathered in so greatly against the pleasure of God, as that fruit which makes the heart of monks so foolish.
For whatsoever the Church guards is all for the folk that ask it in God's name, not for one's kindred, or for another more vile.
The flesh of mortals is so soft that a good beginning suffices not below from the springing of the oak to the forming of the acorn.
Peter began without gold and without silver, and I with prayers and with fasting, and Francis in humility his convent;
and if thou lookest at the source of each, and then lookest again whither it has run, thou wilt see dark made of the white.
Truly, Jordan turned back, and the sea fleeing when God willed, were more marvellous to behold than succor here.”
Thus he said to me, and then drew back to his company, and the company closed up; then like a whirlwind all gathered itself upward.
The sweet Lady urged me behind them, with only a sign, up over that stairway; so did her virtue overcome my nature.
But never here below, where one mounts and descends naturally, was there motion so rapid that it could be compared unto my wing.
So may I return, Reader, to that devout triumph, for the sake of which I often bewail my sins and beat my breast,
thou hadst not so quickly drawn out and put thy finger in the fire as I saw the sign which follows the Bull, and was within it.
O glorious stars, O light impregnate with great virtue, from which I acknowledge all my genius, whatever it may be;
with you was born and with you was hiding himself he who is father of every mortal life, when I first felt the Tuscan air;
and then, when the grace was bestowed on me of entrance within the lofty wheel which turns you, your region was allotted to me.
To you my soul now devoutly sighs to acquire virtue for the difficult pass which draws her to itself.
“Thou art so near the ultimate salvation,” began Beatrice, “that thou oughtest to have thine eyes clear and sharp.
And therefore ere thou further enterest it, look back downward, and see how great a world I have already set beneath thy feet,
in order that thy heart, so far as it is able, may present itself joyous to the triumphant crowd which comes glad through this round aether.”
With my sight I returned through each and all the seven spheres, and saw this globe such that I smiled at its mean semblance;
and that counsel I approve as best which holds it of least account; and he who thinks of other things may be called truly worthy.
I saw the daughter of Latona enkindled without that shadow which had been the cause why I once believed her rare and dense.
The aspect of thy son, Hyperion, here I endured, and I saw how Maia and Dione move around and near him.
Then appeared to me the temperateness of Jove, between his father and his son, and then was clear to me the variation which they make in their places.
And all the seven were displayed to me,[[how great they are and how swift they are, and how they are in distant houses.
While I was revolving with the eternal Twins, the little threshing-floor which makes us so fierce all appeared to me, from its hills to its harbors.
Then I turned back my eyes to the beautiful eyes.
