As the bird, among the beloved leaves,
reposing on the nest of her sweet brood
through the night which hides things from us,
who, in order to see their longed-for looks
and to find the food wherewith she may feed them,
in which heavy toils are pleasing to her,
anticipates the time upon the open twig,
and with ardent affection awaits the sun,
fixedly looking till the dawn may break;
thus my Lady was standing erect
and attentive, turned toward the region
beneath which the sun shows least haste;
so that I, seeing her rapt and eager,
became such as he who in desire
should wish for something, and in hope is satisfied.
But short while was there between one and the other WHEN:
that of my awaiting, I mean, and of my seeing
the heavens become brighter and brighter.
And Beatrice said, “Behold the hosts
of the triumph of Christ, and all the fruit
harvested by the revolution of these spheres.”
It seemed to me her face was all aflame,
and her eyes were so full of joy
that I must needs pass it over without description.
As in the clear skies at the full moon
Trivia smiles among the eternal nymphs
who paint the heaven through all its depths,
I saw, above myriads of lights,
a Sun that was enkindling each and all of them,
as ours kindles the supernal shows;
and through its living light
the lucent Substance shone so bright
upon my face that I sustained it not.
O Beatrice, sweet guide and dear!
She said to me, “That which overcomes thee
is a power from which naught defends itself.
Here is the Wisdom and the Power
that opened the roads between heaven and earth,
for which there had already been such long desire.”
As fire from a cloud unlocks itself
by dilating, so that it is not contained therein,
and against its own nature falls down to earth,
so my mind, amid those feasts,
becoming greater, issued from itself;
and what it became cannot remember.
Open thine eyes and look at what I am;
thou hast seen things such that
thou art become able to sustain my smile.
I was as one who awakes
from a forgotten dream and endeavors
in vain to bring it back again to memory,
when I heard this invitation, worthy
of such gratitude that it is never effaced
from the book which records the past.
If now all those tongues should sound
which Polyhymnia and her sisters made
most fat with their sweetest milk to aid me,
to a thousandth of the truth
one would not come in singing the holy smile
and how it made the holy face resplendent.
And thus in depicting Paradise
the consecrated poem needs must make a leap,
even as one who finds his way cut off.
But whoso should consider the ponderous theme
and the mortal shoulder which therewith is laden
would not blame it if under this it tremble.
It is no coasting voyage for a little barque,
this which the intrepid prow goes cleaving,
nor for a pilot who would spare himself.
“Why doth my face so enamour thee
that thou turnest not to the fair garden
which beneath the rays of Christ is blossoming?
Here is the rose, in which the Divine Word
became flesh: here are the lilies
by whose odor the good way was taken.”
Thus Beatrice, and I, who to her counsel
was wholly prompt, again betook me
unto the battle of the feeble brows.
As in a sunbeam which streamed bright
through a rifted cloud, a meadow of flowers
my eyes, covered with a shadow, have ere now seen
so saw I many throngs of splendors,
flashed-upon from above with burning rays,
without seeing the source of the gleams.
O benignant Power which so dost impress them,
upwards didst thou exalt thyself to bestow space
there for my eyes, which were powerless.
The name of the fair flower which I ever invoke
both morning and evening, wholly constrained
my mind to gaze upon the greater fire.
And when were depicted in both my eyes,
the form and the glory of the living star,
which up. there surpasses as here below it surpassed,
through the mid heavens a torch, descended,
formed in a circle in fashion of a crown,
and engirt it, and revolved around it.
Whatever melody sounds sweetest
here below, and to itself most draws the soul,
would seem a cloud which, rent apart, thunders,
compared with the sound of that lyre
wherewith was crowned the beauteous sapphire
by which the brightest Heaven is ensapphired.
“I am angelic Love, and I circle round
the lofty joy which breathes from the bosom
which was the hostelry of our desire;
and I shall circle, Lady of Heaven, while
thou shalt follow thy Son and make more divine
the supreme sphere because thou enterest it.”
Thus the circling melody
sealed itself up, and all the other lights
made resound the name of Mary.
The royal mantle of all the volumes
of the world, which is most fervid and most quickened
in the breath of God and in His ways,
had its inner shore above us
so distant that sight of it,
there where I was, did not yet appear to me.
Therefore my eyes had not the power
to follow the incoronate flame,
which mounted upward following her own seed.
And as a little child which, toward its mother
stretches its arms, when it has taken the milk,
through the spirit that flames up outwardly,
each of these white splendors stretched upward
with its summit, so that the deep aflection
which they had for Mary was manifest to me.
Then they remained there in ray sight,
singing “Regina coeli “ so sweetly
that never has the delight departed from me.
Oh how great is the plenty that is heaped up
in those most rich chests which were
good laborers in sowing here below!
Here they live and enjoy the treasure
that was acquired while weeping in the exile
of Babylon, where the gold was left aside.
Here triumphs, under the high Son
of God and of Mary, in his victory,
both with the ancient and with the new council,
he who holds the keys of such glory.
