O company elect to the great supper
of the blessed Lamb, who feeds you
so that your desire is always full,
since by grace of God this man foretastes
of that which falls from your table,
before death prescribes the time for him,
give heed to his immense longing
and bedew him a little; ye drink
ever of the fount whence comes that which he ponders.”
Thus Beatrice; and those glad souls
made themselves spheres upon fixed poles,
flaming brightly in manner of comets.
And as wheels within the fittings of clocks
revolve, so that to him who gives heed the first
seems quiet, and the last to fly,
so these carols, differently
dancing, their riches
enabled me to estimate, swift and slow.
From that which I noted of greatest beauty,
I saw issue a fire so happy
that it left there none of greater brightness;
and three times it revolved round Beatrice
with a song so divine
that my fancy repeats it not to me;
therefore the pen makes a leap, and I write it not,
for our imagination, for such folds,
much more our speech, is of too vivid color
O holy sister mine, who so prayest to us,
devoutly, by thy ardent affection
thou unbindest me from that beautiful sphere:
after it had stopped, the blessed fire
directed to my Lady its breath,
which spoke thus as I have said.
And she, “O light eternal of the great man
to whom our Lord left the keys,
which he bore below, of this marvellous joy,
test this man on points light and grave,
as pleases thee, concerning the Faith,
through which thou didst walk upon the sea.
If he loves rightly, and hopes rightly, and believes,
it is hidden not from thee, for thou hast thy sight there
where everything—@is seen depicted.
But since this realm has made citizens
by the true faith, to glorify it,
it is well that speech of it should fall to him.”
Even as, the bachelor speaks not, and arms himself
until the master propounds the question,
in order to adduce the proof, not to decide it,
so, I was arming me with every reason
while she was speaking, in order to be ready
for such a questioner, and for such a profession.
“Say thou, good Christian, declare thyself;
Faith,—what is it?” Whereon I raised my brow
to that light whence this was breathed out.
Then I turned to Beatrice, and she
made prompt signals to me that I should pour
the water forth from my internal fount.
“May the Grace which grants to me that I confess myself,”
began I, “to the high captain,
cause my conceptions to be expressed.”
And I went on, “As the veracious pen,
wrote of it, Father, of thy dear brother
(who with thee set Rome on the good track)
Faith is the substance of things hoped for,
and evidence of things not seen:
and this appears to me its essence.”
Then I heard, “Rightly dost thou think,
if thou understandest well why he placed it
among the substances, and then among the evidences.”
And I thereon: “The deep things
which grant unto me here the sight of themselves,
are so hidden to eyes below
that there their existence is in belief alone,
upon which the high hope is founded,
and therefore it takes the designation of substance;
and from this belief we needs must
syllogize, without having other sight,
wherefore it receives the designation of evidence.”
Then I heard, “If whatever is acquired
below for doctrine, were so understood,
the wit of sophist would have no place there.”
Thus was breathed forth from that enkindled love;
then it added, “Very well
have the alloy and the weight of this coin been now run through,
but tell me if thou hast it in thy purse?”
And I, “Yes, I have it so shining and so round
that in its stamp nothing is uncertain to me.”
Then issued from the deep light
which was shining there, “This precious jewel,
whereon every virtue is founded,
whence came it to thee?” And I, “The abundant rain
of the Heavenly Spirit, which is diffused
over the Old and over the New parchments,
is a syllogism which has proved it to me
so acutely that in comparison with it
every demonstration seems to me obtuse.”
I heard then, “The Old and the New
proposition which are so conclusive to thee,—
why dost thou hold them for divine speech?”
And I, “The proofs which disclose the truth to me
are the works that followed, for which nature
never heated iron, nor beat anvil.”
It was replied to me, “Say, what assures thee
that these works were? The very thing itself
which requires to be proved, naught else, affirms it to thee.”
“If the world were converted to Christianity,”
said I, “without miracles, this alone
is such that the others are not the hundredth part;
for thou didst enter poor and fasting
into the field to sow the good plant,
which once was a vine and now has become a thornbush.”
This ended, the high holy Court
resounded through the spheres a “We praise God,”
in the melody which thereabove is sung.
And that Baron who thus from branch to branch,
examining, had now drawn me on,
so that to the last leaves we were approaching, began again:
“The Grace that dallies
with thy mind has opened thy mouth
up to this point as it should be opened,
so that I approve that which has issued forth,
but now there is need to express what thou believest,
and wbence it has been offered to thy belief.”
O holy father, spirit who seest
that which thou so believedst that thou didst outdo
toward the sepulchre, younger feet,”
began I, “thou wishest that I should declare
here the form of my ready belief,
and also thou inquirest the cause of it.
And I answer: I believe in one God,
sole and eternal, who moves all the Heavens
unmoved, with love and with desire;
and for such belief have I not only proofs
physical and metaphysical, but gives it to me
also that truth which hence rains down
through Moses, through Prophets, and through Psalms,
through the Gospel, and through you who wrote
after the fiery Spirit made you holy.
And I believe in three Eternal Persons, and these
I believe one essence, so one and so threefold
that it will admit to be conjoined with ARE and IS.
Of the profound divine condition
on which I touch, sets the seal upon my mind
the evangelic doctrine ofttimes.
This is the beginning; this is the spark
which afterwards dilates to vivid flame,
and like a star in heaven scintillates within me.”
Even as a lord who hears what pleases him,
thereon, embraces his servant, rejoicing
in the news, soon as he is silent,
thus, blessing me as he sang,
thrice encircled me when I was silent;
the apostolic light, at whose command
I had spoken, so had I pleased him in my speech.
