If it ever happen that the sacred poem to which both heaven and earth have set their hand, so that it has made me lean for many years,
sbould overcome the cruelty which bars me out of the fair sheep-fold, where a lamb I slept, an enemy to the wolves that give it war,
then with other voice, with other fleece, Poet will I return, and on the font of my baptism will I take the crown;
because there I entered into the faith which makes the souls known to God, and afterward. Peter, for its sake, thus encircled my brow.
Then a light moved toward us from that sphere whence the first-fruit which Christ left of His vicars had issued.
And my Lady, full of gladness, said to me, “Look, look! behold the Baron for whose sake Galicia is visited there below.”
Even as when the dove alights near his companion, and one, turning and cooing, displays its affection to the other,
so by the one great Prince glorious I saw the other greeted, praising the food which feasts them thereabove.
But after their gratulation was completed, silent coram me, each stopped, so ignited that it overcame my sight.
Smiling, then Beatrice said, “Illustrious life, by whom the largess of our basilica has been written,
do thou make Hope resound upon this height; thou knowest that thou dost represent it as many times as Jesus to the three displayed most brightness.”
“Lift up thy head and make thyself assured; for that which comes up here from the mortal world needs must be ripened in our rays.”
This comfort from the second fire came to me; whereon I lifted up my eyes unto the mountains which bent them down before with too great weight.
“Since, through grace, our Emperor wills that thou, before thy death, come face to face with his Counts in the most secret hall,
so that, having seen the truth of this Court, thou mayest therewith confirm in thyself and others the Hope which there below rightly enamours,
say what it is, and how thy mind is flowering with it, and say whence it came to thee;” thus further did the second light proceed.
And that compassionate one, who guided the feathers of my wings to such high flight, thus in the reply anticipated me.
“The Church militant has not any son with more hope, as is written in the Sun which irradiates all our band;
therefore it is conceded to him, that from Egypt be should come to Jerusalem to see, ere the warfare be at end for him.
The other two points which are asked not for sake of knowing, but that he may report how greatly this virtue is pleasing to thee,
to him I leave, for they will not be difficult to him, nor of vainglory, and let him answer to this, and may the grace of God accord this to him.”
As a disciple who follows his teacher, prompt and willing, in that wherein he is expert, so that his worth may be disclosed:
“Hope,” said I, “is a sure expectation of future glory, which divine grace produces, and preceding merit.
From many stars this light comes to me, but be instilled it first into my heart who was the supreme singer of the supreme Leader.
Sperent in te, 'who know thy name,' he says in his Theody, and who knows it not, if he has my faith?
Thou afterwards didst instil it into me with his instillation in thy Epistle, so that I am full, and upon others shower down again your rain.”
While I was speaking, within the living bosom of that burning a flash was trembling, sudden and intense, in the manner of lightning.
Then it breathed, “The love wherewith I still glow toward the virtue which followed me far as the palm, and to the issue of the field, wills that
breathe anew to thee, that thou delight in it; and it is my pleasure, that thou tell that which Hope promises to thee.”
And I, “The new and the old Scriptures set up the sign, and it points this out to me. Of the souls whom God hath made his friends,
Isaiah says that each shall be clothed in his own land with a double garment, and his own land is this sweet life.
And thy brother, far more explicitly, there where he treats of the white robes, makes manifest to us this revelation.”
And first, close on the end of these words, “Sperent in te” was heard from above us, to which all the carols made answer.
Then among them a light became so bright that, if the Crab had one such crystal, winter would have a month of one sole day.
And as a glad maiden rises and goes and enters in the dance, only to do honor to the new bride, and not for any fault,
so saw I the brightened splendor come to the two who were turning in a wheel, such as was befitting to their ardent love.
It set itself there into the song and into the measure, and my Lady kept her gaze upon them, even as a bride, silent and motionless.
“This is he who lay upon the breast of our Pelican, and from upon the cross this one was chosen to the great office.”
Thus my Lady, nor yet moved she her look from its fixed attention after than before these words of hers.
As is he who gazes and endeavors to see the sun eclipsed a little, who through seeing becomes sightless,
so did I become in respect to that last fire, till it was said, “Why dost thou dazzle thyself in order to see a thing which has no place here?
On earth my body is earth; and it will be there with the others until our number corresponds with the eternal purpose.
With their two garments in the blessed cloister are those two lights alone which ascended: and this thou shalt carry back unto your world.”
At this word the flaming gyre became quiet, together with the sweet mingling that was made of the sound of the trinal breath,
even as, at ceasing of fatigue or danger, the oars, erst driven through the water, all stop at the sound of a whistle.
Ah! how greatly was I disturbed in mind, when I turned to see Beatrice, at not being able to see her, although I was
near her, and in the happy world.
