While I was apprehensive because of my quenched sight,
from the effulgent flame that quenched it,
a breath which made me attentive issued
saying, “While thou art regaining the sense
of sight which thou hast consumed on me,
it is well that thou make up for it by discourse.
Begin then, and tell whereto
thy soul is aimed, and make thy reckoning that
sight is in thee bewildered and not dead;
because the Lady who conducts thee through this divine
region has in her look
the virtue which the band of Ananias had.”
I said, “According to her pleasure, or soon or late,
let the cure come to the eyes which were gates
when she entered with the fire wherewith I ever burn!
The Good which makes this court content
is Alpha and Omega of whatsoever writing
Love reads to me, either low or loud.”
That same voice which fear
had taken from me of the sudden dazzling,
laid on me the charge to speak further,
and said, “Surely with a finer sieve
it behoves thee to clarify; it behoves thee to tell
who directed thy bow to such a target.”
And I, “By philosophic arguments
and by authority that hence descends,
such love must needs be impressed on me;
for the good, so far as it is good, in proportion as it is understood,
kindles love; and so much the greater
as the more of goodness it includes within itself.
Therefore, to the Essence (wherein is such supremacy
that every good which is found outside of It
is naught else than a beam of Its own radiance),
more than to any other, must needs be moved
the mind in love of every one who discerns
the truth on which this argument is founded.
Such truth to my intelligence he makes plain,
who demonstrates to me the first love
of all the sempiternal substances.
The voice of the true Author makes it plain
who, speaking of Himself, says to Moses,
'I will make thee see all goodness.'
Thou, too, makest it plain to me, beginning
the lofty proclamation which declares the secret
of this place on high.” there below, above all other trump,
And I heard, “By human understanding
and by authorities concordant with it,
thy sovran love looks unto God;
but say, further, if thou feelest other cords
draw thee towards Him, so that thou mayest declare
with how many teeth this love bites thee.”
The holy intention was not latent
of the Eagle of Christ to me; nay, rather I perceived
whither he wished to lead my profession;
therefore, I began again: “All those bitings
which can make the heart turn to God
have been concurrent unto my charity;
for the existence of the world, and my own existence,
the death that He endured that I may live,
and that which all the faithful hope even as I do,
together with the aforesaid living knowledge,
have drawn me from the sea of perverted love,
and have set me on the shore of the right.
The leaves, wherewith all the garden is enleaved,
of the Eternal Gardener I love in proportion
as good is borne unto them from Him.”
Soon as I was silent a most sweet song
resounded through the heavens, and my Lady
said with the rest, “Holy, Holy, Holy.”
And as at a keen light sleep is broken
by the spirit of sight, which runs
to the splendor that goes from coat to coat,
and he who awakes shrinks from what he sees,
so confused is his sudden wakening,
until his judgment comes to his aid;
thus every mote from my eyes
Beatrice chased away with the radiance of her own,
which were resplendent more than a thousand miles;
so that I then saw better than before;
and, as it were amazed, I asked
about a fourth light which I saw with us.
And my Lady, “Within those rays
the first soul gazes with joy upon its creator
which the First Power ever created.”
As the bough that bends its top
at passing of the wind, and then lifts itself
by its own virtue which raises it,
so did I, in amazement, the while she was speaking;
and then gave me again assurance,
a desire to speak, wherewith I was burning,
and I began, “O Apple, that mature
alone wast produced, O ancient Father,
to whom every bride is daughter and daughter-in-law,
devoutly as I can, I supplicate thee
that thou speak to me; thou seest my wish,
and in order to hear thee quickly, I do not tell it.”
Sometimes an animal, which is covered up, stirs,
so that his desire must needs become apparent
through the corresponding movement which that which wraps him makes;
and in like manner the first soul
made evident to me, through its covering,
how gladly it came to do me pleasure.
Then it breathed, “Without its being uttered to me
by thee, I better discern thy wish,
than thou whatever thing is most certain to thee;
because I see it in the truthful mirror
which makes of Itself a likeness of other tbings,
while nothing makes for It a likeness of Itself.
Thou wouldst hear how long it is since God placed me
in the lofty garden where this Lady
disposed thee for so long a stairway;
and how long it was a delight to my eyes;
and the proper cause of the great wrath;
and the idiom which I used and which I made.
Now, my son, the tasting of the tree
was not by itself the cause of so long an exile,
but only the overpassing of the bound.
There whence thy Lady moved Virgil,
during four thousand three hundred and two revolutions
of the sun; I longed for this assembly
and I saw him return to all the lights
of his path nine hundred and thirty
times while I was on earth.
The tongue which I spoke was all extinct
long before their unaccomplishable work;
the people of Nimrod attempted
for never any product of the reason
because of human liking, which alters,
following the heavens was durable for ever.
A natural action it is for man to speak;
but, thus or thus, nature leaves
then for you to do according as it pleases you.
Before I descended to the infernal anguish,
the Supreme Good was on earth called I;
whence comes the gladness that swathes me,
EL it was called afterwards; and that must needs be,
for the custom of mortals is as a leaf
on a branch, which goes away and another comes.
On the mountain which rises highest from the wave
I was, with pure life and sinful,
from the first hour to that which,
when the sun changes quadrant, follows the sixth hour.”
