“To the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit be glory,” all Paradise began, so that the sweet song was inebriating me.
That which I was seeing seemed to me a smile of the Universe; for my inebriation was entering through the hearing and through the sight.
O joy! O ineffable gladness! O life entire of love and of peace! O riches secure, without longing!
Before my eyes the four torches were standing enkindled, and that which had come first began to make itself more vivid,
and in its semblance be came such as Jove would become, if be and Mars were birds, and should interchange feathers.
The Providence which here apportions turn and office, had imposed silence on the blessed choir on every side,
when I heard, “If I change color, marvel not; for, while I speak, thou shalt see all these change color.
He who on earth usurps my place, my place, my place, which is vacant in the presence of the Son of God,
has made of my burial-place a sewer of blood and of stench, wherewith the Perverse One who fell from here above, below there is placated.”
With that color which, by reason of the opposite sun, paints the cloud at evening and at morning, I then saw the whole Heaven overspread.
And like a modest lady who abides sure of herself, and at the fault of another, in bearing of it only, becomes timid,
even thus did Beatrice change countenance; and such eclipse I believe there was in heaven when the Supreme Power suffered.
Then his words proceeded, in a voice so transmuted from itself that his countenance was not more changed;
“The Bride of Christ was not nurtured on my blood, on that of Linus and of Cletus, to be employed for acquist of gold;
but for acquist of this glad life Sixtus and Pius and Calixtus and Urban shed their blood after much weeping.
It was not our intention that part of the Christian people should sit on the right hand of our successors, and part on the other;
nor that the keys which were conceded to me should become a sign upon a banner which should fight against those who are baptized;
nor that I should be a figure on a seal to venal and mendacious privileges, whereat I often redden and flash.
In garb of shepherd, rapacious wolves are seen from here-above over all the pastures: O defence of God, why dost thou yet lie still!
To drink our blood Cahorsines and Gascons are making ready: O good beginning, to what vile end behoves it that thou fall!
But the high Providence which with Scipio defended for Rome the glory of the world, will succor speedily, as I conceive.
And thou, son, who because of thy mortal weight wilt again return below, open thy mouth, and conceal not that which I conceal not.”
Even as our air snows down flakes of frozen vapors, when the horn of the Goat of heaven touches the sun,
so, upward, I saw the aether become adorned, and flaked with the triumphant vapors that had made sojourn there with us.
My sight was following their semblances, and followed, till the intermediate space by its greatness pre. vented it from passing further onward.
Whereon my Lady, who saw me disengaged from upward heeding, said to me, “Cast down thy sight, and look how thou hast revolved.”
Since the hour when I had first looked, I saw that I had moved through the whole are which the first climate makes from its middle to its end;
so that I saw beyond Cadiz the mad track of Ulysses, and near on this side the shore on which Europa became a sweet burden.
And more of the site of this little threshing-floor would have been discovered to me, but the sun was proceeding beneath my feet, a sign and more removed.
My enamoured mind, that ever dallies with my Lady, was more than ever burning to bring back my eyes to her.
And if nature has made bait in human flesh, or art in its paintings, to catch the eyes in order to possess the mind,
all united would seem naught compared to the divine pleasure which shone upon me when I turned me to her smiling face.
And the virtue with which the look indulged me, tore me from the fair nest of Leda, and impelled me to the swiftest heaven.
Its parts, most living and lofty, are so uniform that I cannot tell which of them Beatrice chose for a place for me.
But she, who saw my desire, began, smiling so glad that God seemed to rejoice in her countenance,
“The nature of the world which quiets the centre, and moves all the rest around it, begins here as from its, starting-point.
And this heaven has no other Where than the Divine Mind, in which the love that revolves it is kindled, and the virtue which it rains down.
Light and love enclose it with one circle, even as this does the others, and of that cincture He who girds it is the sole Intelligence.
The motion of this heaven is not marked out by another, but the others are measured by this, even as ten by a half and by a fifth.
And how time can hold its roots in such a flower-pot, and in the others its leaves, may now be manifest to thee.
“O covetousness, which whelms mortals beneath thee, so that no one has power to withdraw his eyes from out thy waves!
Well. blossoms the will in men, but the continual rain converts the true plums into wildings.
Faith and innocence are found only in children; then both fly away ere yet the cheeks are covered.
One, so long as he stammers, fasts, who afterward, when his tongue is loosed, devours whatever food under whatever moon;
and one, while stammering, loves his mother and listens to her, who, when speech is perfect, desires then to see her buried.
So the skin of the fair daughter of him who brings morning and leaves evening, white in its first aspect, becomes black.
Do thou, in order that thou make not marvel, reflect that on earth there is no one who governs; wherefore the human family is gone astray.
But ere January be all un-wintered by that hundredth part which is down there neglected, these supernal circles shall so roar
that the storm which is so long awaited shall turn the sterns round to where the prows are, so that the fleet shall run straight,
and true fruit shall come after the flower.”
