After she who imparadises my mind had disclosed the truth counter to the present life of wretched mortals,
as he, who is lighted by a candle from behind, sees its flame in a mirror before he has it in sight or in thought,
and turns round to see if the glass tell him the truth, and sees that it accords with it as the note with its measure;
I thus my memory recollects that I did, looking into the beautiful eyes, wherewith Love made the cord to ensnare me.
And when I turned, and mine were touched by that which is apparent in that revolving sphere whenever one gazes fixedly on its gyration,
I saw a Point which was raying out light so keen that the sight on which it blazes must needs close because of its intense keenness.
And whatso star seems smallest here would seem a moon if placed beside it, as star with star is placed.
Perhaps as near as a halo seems to girdle the light which paints it, when the vapor that bears it is most dense,
at such distance round the Point a circle of fire was whirling so swiftly that it would have surpassed that motion which with most speed girds the world;
and this was by another circumcinct, and that by the third, and the third then by the fourth, by the fifth the fourth, and then by the sixth the fifth.
Thereon the seventh followed, so spread now in compass that the messenger of Juno entire would be narrow to contain it.
So the eighth and the ninth; and each was moving more slowly, according as it was in number more distant from the first.
And that one had the clearest flame from which the Pure Spark was least distant; I believe because it partakes more of It.
My Lady, who saw me deeply suspense in doubt, said, “On that Point Heaven and all nature are dependent.
Gaze on that circle which is most conjoined to It, and know that its motion is so swift because of the burning love whereby it is spurred.”
And I to her, “If the world were set in the order which I see in those wheels, that which is propounded to me would have satisfied me;
but in the world of sense the revolutions may be seen so much the more divine as they are more remote from the centre.
Wherefore if my desire is to have end in this marvellous and angelic temple, which has for confine only love and light,
I need yet to hear why the example and the exemplar go not in one fashion, because I by myself contemplate this in vain.”
“If thy fingers are insufficient for such a knot, it is no wonder, so hard has it become through not being tried.”
Thus my Lady; then she said, “Take that which I shall tell thee, if thou wouldest be satisfied, and make subtle thy wit about it.
The corporeal circles are wide and narrow according to the more or less of virtue which is spread through all their parts.
Greater goodness must make greater welfare; the greater body, if it has its parts equally complete, contains greater welfare.
Hence this one, which sweeps along with itself all the rest of the universe, corresponds to the circle which loves most, and knows most.
Therefore, if thou compassest thy measure round the virtue, not round the seeming of the substances which appear circular to thee,
thou wilt see in each heaven a marvellous agreement with its Intelligence, of greater to more and of smaller to less.”
As the hemisphere of the air remains splendid and serene when Boreas blows from that cheek wherewith he is mildest,
whereby the mist which first troubled it is cleared and dissolved, so that the heaven smiles to us with the beauties of all its flock,
so I became after my Lady had provided me with her clear answer, and, like a star in heaven, the truth was seen.
And after her words had stopped, not otherwise does molten iron throw out sparks than the circles sparkled.
Every scintillation followed its flame, and they were so many that their number, was of more thousands than the doubling of the chess.
I heard Hosaimah sung from choir to choir to the fixed Point that holds them, and will forever hold them, at the Ubi in which they have ever been.
And she, who saw the dubious thoughts within my mind, said, “The first circles have shown to thee the Seraphim and the Cherubim.
Thus swiftly they follow their own bonds, in order to liken themselves to the Point so far as they can, and they can so far as they are exalted to see.
Those other loves, which go round about them, are called Thrones of the divine aspect, because they terminated the first triad.
And thou shouldst know that all have delight in proportion as their vision penetrates into the True in which every understanding is at rest.
Hence may be seen how beatitude is founded on the act which sees, not on that which loves, which follows after.
And merit, which grace and good will bring forth, is the measure of this seeing; thus is the progress from grade to grade.
The next triad that thus buds in this sempiternal spring which the nightly Aries despoils not,
perpetually sing their spring song of Hosannah with three melodies, which sound in the three orders of joy wherewith it is threefold.
In this hierarchy are the three Divinities, first Dominations, and then the Virtues; the third order is of Powers.
Then, in the two penultimate dances, the Principalities and Archangels circle; the last is wholly of Angelic sports.
These orders are all upward gazing, and downward prevail, so that toward God they all are drawn, and they all draw.
And Dionysius with such great desire set himself to contemplate these orders, that he named and divided them, as I.
But Gregory afterward separated from him; wherefore, so soon as he opened his eyes in this Heaven, he smiled at himself.
And if a mortal proffered on earth so much of secret truth, I would not have thee wonder, for he who saw it hereabove disclosed it to him,
with much else of the truth of these circles.
