When both the children of Latona,
covered by the Ram and by the Scales,
together make a zone of the horizon,
as long as from the moment the zenith holds them in balance,
till one and the other from that girdle,
changing their hemisphere, are unbalanced, soloing,
with her countenance painted with a smile,
was Beatrice silent, looking
fixedly upon the Point which had overcome me.
Then she began: “I speak, and I ask not
what thou wishest to hear, for I have seen it
where every WHERE and every WHEN are centred.
Not for the gain of good unto Himself,
which cannot be, but that His splendor might,
in resplendence, say, Subsisto;
in His own eternity, outside of time,
outside of every other limit, as pleased Him,
the Eternal Love disclosed Himself in new loves.
Nor before, as if inert, did He lie;
for had proceeded neither before nor after
the going forth of God upon these waters.
Form and matter, conjoined and simple,
came forth to existence which had no defect,
as three arrows from a three-stringed bow;
and as in glass, in amber, or in crystal
a ray shines so that
there is no interval between its coining and its complete existence,
so the triform effect from its Lord
rayed forth into its existence all at once,
without discrimination of beginning.
Order was concreate, and established
for the substances, and those were top
of the world in which pure act was produced
Pure potency held the lowest part;
in the middle unites potency with act,
such a bond that it is never unbound.
Jerome has written to you
of the Angels, created a long tract
of centuries before the rest of the world was made.
But this truth is written on many pages
by the writers of the that Holy Spirit:
and thou wilt thyself discover it, if thou watchest well for it;
and even the reason sees it somewhat,
for it would not admit that the motors
could be so long without their perfection.
Now thou knowest where and when these loves
were elected, and how; so that quenched
three flames of thy desire are already
One would not reach to twenty, in counting,
so quickly as a part of the Angels
disturbed the subject of your elements.
The rest remained and began this art
which thou beboldest, with such great delight
that they never cease from circling.
The origin of the fall was the accursed
pride of him whom thou hast seen
opprest by all the weights of the world
Those whom thou seest here were modest
in grateful recognition of the goodness
which had made them ready for intelligence so great;
wherefore their vision was exalted
with illuminant grace and with their merit,
so that they have full and steadfast will.
And I wish that thou doubt not, but be certain,
that to receive grace is meritorious
in proportion as the affection is open to it.
Henceforth, round about this consistory
thou canst contemplate sufficiently, if words
my have been harvested, without other assistance.
But because on earth in your schools it is taught
that the angelic nature
is such that it understands, and remembers, and wills,
I will speak further, in order that thou mayest see pure
the truth which there below is mixed,
through the equivocation in such like teaching.
These substances, from the time that they were glad
in the face of God, have not turned their sight
from it, from which nothing is concealed.
Therefore they have not their vision interrupted
by a new object, and therefore do not need
because of divided thought to recollect.
So that there below, men dream when not asleep,
believing and not believing to speak truth;
but in the one is more fault and more shame.
Ye go not below along one path
in philosophizing; so much do
the love of appearance and the thought of it transport you;
and yet this is endured hereabove
with less indignation than when
the divine Scripture is set aside, or when it is perverted.
Men think not there how much blood it costs
to sow it in the world, and how much he pleases
who humbly keeps close to its side.
Every one strives for appearance, and makes
his own inventions, and those are discoursed of
by the preachers, and the Gospel is silent.
One says that the moon turned back
at the passion of Christ and interposed herself,
so that the light of the sun reached not down;
and others that the light hid itself
of its own accord, so that for the Spaniards and for the Indians
as well as for the Jews this eclipse answered.
Florence hath not so many Lapi and Bindi
as there are fables such as these the year long
shouted from the pulpits, on every side;
so that the poor flocks, who have no knowledge,
return from the pasture fed with wind;
and not seeing the harm does not excuse them.
Christ did not say to his first company,
'Go, and preach idle stories to the world,'
but he gave to them the true foundation;
and that alone sounded in their cheeks,
so that in the battle for kindling of the faith
they made shield and lance of the Gospel.
Now men go forth to preach with jests and with buffooneries,
and provided only there is a good laugh
the cowl puffs up, and nothing more is required.
But such a bird is nesting in the tail of the hood,
that if the crowd should see it, they would see
the pardon in which they confide;
through which such great folly has grown on earth,
that, without proof of any testimony,
men would flock to every indulgence.
On this the pig of St. Antony fattens,
and others also, who are far more pigs,
paying with money that has no stamp of coinage.
But because we have digressed enough,
turn back thine eyes now toward the straight path,
so that the way be shortened with the time.
This nature so extends
in number, that never was there speech
or mortal concept that could go so far.
And if thou considerest that which is revealed
by Daniel thou wilt see that in his thousands
a determinate number is concealed
The primal light that irradiates it all
is received in it by as many modes
as are the splendors with which the light pairs itself.
Wherefore, since upon the act that conceives,
the affection follows, the sweetness of love
diversely in this nature glows and warms.
Behold now the height and the breadth
of the Eternal Goodness, since it has made
for itself so many mirrors on which it is broken,
One in itself remaining as before.”
