In form then of a pure white rose
the holy host was shown to me,
which, in His own blood, Christ made His bride.
But the other, which, flying, sees and sings
the glory of Him who enamours it,
and the goodness which made it so great,
like a swarm of bees which are among the flowers
one while and anon return
to the place where their work gets its savor,
were descending into the great flower which is adorned
with so many leaves, and thence rising up again
to where their love always abides.
Their faces all were of living flame,
and their wings of gold,
and the rest so white that no snow reaches that extreme.
When they descended into the flower, from bench to bench,
they imparted somewhat of the peace and of the ardor
which they acquired as they fanned their sides.
Nor did the interposing between what was above and the flower
of such a flying plenitude
impede the sight and the splendor;
for the divine light penetrates
through the universe, according as it is worthy,
so that naught can be an obstacle to it.
This secure and joyous realm,
thronged with aneient and with modern folk,
had all its look and love upon one mark.
O Trinal Light, which in a single star,
scintillating on their sight, so satisfies them,
look down here upon our tempest!
If the Barbarians, coming from a region
such that every day it is covered by Helice,
revolving with her son of whom she is fond,
when they beheld Rome and her arduous work,
were wonderstruck, what time Lateran
rose above mortal things,
I, who to the divine from the human,
to the eternal from the temporal, had come,
and from Florence to a people just and sane,
with what amazement must I have been full!
Surely what with it and the joy I was well pleased
not to hear, and to stand mute.
And as a pilgrim who is refreshed
in the temple of his vow in looking round,
and hopes now to report how it was,
so, journeying through the living light,
I carried my eyes over the ranks,
now up, now down, and now circling about.
I saw faces persuasive to love,
beautified by the light of Another and by their own smile,
and actions ornate with every dignity.
the general form of Paradise
My look had now comprehended as a whole,
and on no part yet my sight was fixed;
and I turned me with re-enkindled wish
to ask my Lady about things
concerning which my mind was in suspense.
One thing I was meaning, and another answered me;
I was thinking to see Beatrice, and I saw an old man,
robed like the people in glory.
His eyes and his cheeks were overspread
with benignant joy, in pious mien
such as befits a tender father.
And, “Where is she?” on a sudden said I.
Whereon he, “To terminate thy desire,
Beatrice urged me from my place,
and if thou lookest up to the third circle
from the highest step, thou wilt again see her
upon the throne which her merits have allotted to her.”
Without answering I lifted up my eyes,
and saw her as she made for herself a crown,
reflecting from herself the eternal rays.
From that region which thunders highest up
no mortal eye is so far distant,
in whatsoever sea it loses itself the lowest,
as there from Beatrice was my sight.
But this was naught to me, for her image
did not descend to me blurred by aught between.
O Lady, in whom my hope is strong,
and who, for my salvation, didst endure
to leave thy footprints in Hell,
of all those things which I have seen,
by thy power and by thy goodness
I recognize the grace and the virtue.
Thou hast drawn me from servitude to liberty
by all those ways, by all the modes
whereby thou hadst the power to do this.
Guard thou in me thine own magnificence
so that my soul, which thou hast made whole,
may, pleasing to thee, be unloosed from the body.”
Thus I prayed; and she, so distant
as it seemed, smiled, and looked at me;
then turned to the eternal fountain.
And the holy old man,
“In order that thou mayest complete perfectly,” he said, “thy journey,
whereto prayer and holy love sent me,
fly with thy eyes through this garden;
for seeing it will prepare thy look
to mount further through the divine radiance.
And the Queen of Heaven, for whom I burn
wholly with love, will grant us every grace,
because I am her faithful Bernard.”
As is he who comes perchance from Croatia
to see our Veronica,
who is not satisfied by its ancient fame,
but says in thought, while it is shown,
“My Lord Jesus Christ, true God,
now was your semblance like to this?”
such was I, gazing on the living charity
of him who, in this world,
in contemplation, tasted of that peace.
“Son of Grace, this glad existence,”
began he, “will not be known to thee
holding thine eyes only below here at the bottom,
but look on the circles even to the most remote,
until thou seest upon her seat the Queen
to whom this realm is subject and devoted.”
I lifted up my eyes; and as at morning
the eastern parts of the horizon
surpass that where the sun declines,
thus, as if going from valley to mountain,
with my eyes, I saw a part on the extreme verge
vanquishing in light all the other front.
And even as there where the pole is awaited,
which Phaeton guided ill, the flame is brighter,
and on this side and that the light grows less,
so that pacific oriflamme
was vivid at the middle, and on each side
in equal measure the flame slackened.
And at that mid part with wings outspread,
I saw more than a thousand jubilant Angels,
each distinct both in brightness and in act.
I saw there at their sports and at their songs
a Beauty smiling which
was joy in the eyes of all the other saints
And if I had such wealth in speech
as in imagining, I should not dare
to attempt the least of its delightfulness.
Bernard, when he saw my eyes
fixed and intent upon its warm glow,
turned his own with such affection to it,
that he made mine more ardent to gaze anew.
