Fixed in affection upon his Delight, that contemplator
freely assumed the office of a teacher,
and began these holy words:
The wound which Mary closed up and anointed,
she who is so beautiful at her feet
is she who opened it and who pierced it.
in the order which the third seats make,
Beneath her, sits Rachel
with Beatrice, as thou seest.
Sara, Rebecca, Judith, and she
who was great-grandmother of the singer who, through sorrow
for his sin, said Miserere mei,
thou mayest see thus from step to step
in gradation downward, as with the name of each
I go downward through the rose from leaf to leaf
And from the seventh row downwards, even as
down to it, Hebrew women follow in succession,
dividing all the tresses of the flower;
because according to the look which
faith turned on Christ these are the wall
by which the sacred stairways are separated
On this side, where the flower is mature
with all its leaves, are seated
those who believed in Christ about to come.
On the other side, where the semicircles are broken
by empty spaces, are
those who turned their faces on Christ already come.
And as on this side the glorious seat
of the Lady of Heaven, and the other seats
below it, make so great a division,
thus, opposite, does that of the great John,
who, ever holy, the desert and martyrdom
endured, and then Hell for two years;
and beneath him are allotted thfis to divide,
Francis and Benedict and Augustine
and others far down as here from circle to circle.
Now behold the high divine foresight;
for one and the other aspect of the faith
will fill this garden equally.
And know that downwards from the row which
midway cleaves the two divisions,
they are seated for no merit of their own,
but for that of others, under certain conditions;
for all these are spirits absolved
ere they had true election.
Well canst thou perceive it by their looks,
and also by their childish voices,
if thou lookest well upon them and if thou listenest to them.
Now thou art perplexed, and in perplexity art silent;
but I will loose for thee the strong bond
in which thy subtile thoughts fetter thee.
Within the amplitude of this realm
a casual point can have no place,
any more than sadness, or thirst, or hunger;
for is established by eternal law,
whatever thou seest, so that exactly
here the ring answers to the finger.
And therefore this folk, hastened
to true life, is not sine causa
here among itself more and less excellent.
The King through whom this realm reposes
in such great love and in such great delight,
that no will is venturesome for more,
all the minds in His own glad aspect,
creating, diversely endows with grace according to His own pleasure;
and here let the fact suffice.
And this is expressly and clearly noted for you
in the Holy Scripture in those twins
who, while within their mother, had their anger roused.
Therefore, according to the color of the hair
of such grace, the highest light
befittingly it behoves to crown them.
Without, then, merit from their modes of Efe,
they are placed in different grades,
differing only in their primary keenness of vision.
Thus in the fresh centuries
together with innocence, to secure salvation.
the faith of parents alone sufficed,
After the first ages were complete,
it was needful for males with their innocent plumage
to acquire virtue through circumcision.
But after the time of grace had come,
without perfect baptism in Christ,
such minocence was kept there below.
Look now upon the face which most resembles Christ,
for its brightness
only can prepare thee to see Christ.
I saw upon her such great joy
raining, borne in the holy minds
created to fly across through that height,
that whatsoever I had seen before
had not rapt me with such great admiration,
nor shown to me such likeness to God.
And that love which had first descended there,
singing “Ave, Maria, gratia plena,”
in front of her spread wide his wings.
responded to the divine song
The blessed Court from all parts,
so that every countenance became thereby serener.
O holy Father, who for me
submittest to be below here, leaving the sweet place
in which thou sittest through eternal allotment,
who is that Angel who with such jubilee
looks into the eyes of our Queen,
so enamoured that he seems of fire?”
Thus I again had recourse to the teaching
of him who was made beautiful by Mary,
as the morning star by the sun.
And he to me, “Confidence and grace
as much as there can be in Angel and in soul,
axe all in him, and so we would have it be,
for he it is who bore the palm
down to Mary, when the Son of God
willed to load Himself with our burden.
But come now with thine eyes, as I
shall go on speaking, and note the great patricians
of this most just and pious empire.
Those two who sit there above, most happy
through being nearest to the Empress,
are, as it were, the two roots of this rose.
He who on the left is close to her
is the Father through whose rash taste
the human race tastes so much bitterness.
On the right thou seest that ancient Father
of Holy Church, to whom Christ entrusted the keys
of this lovely flower.
And he who saw all the heavy times
before his death of the beautiful bride,
who was won with the lance and with the nails,
sits at his side; and alongside the other rests
that leader, under whom lived on manna
the ingrate, fickle and stubborn people
Opposite Peter thou seest Anna sitting,
so content to gaze upon her daughter,
that she moves not her eyes while singing Hosannah;
and opposite the eldest father of a family
sits Lucia, who moved thy Lady,
when thou didst bend thy brow to rush downward.
But because the time flies which holds thee slumbering,
here will we make a stop, like a good tailor
who makes the gown according as he has cloth,
and we will direct our eyes to the First Love,
so that, looking towards Him, thou mayst penetrate
so far as is possible through His effulgence.
Truly, lest perchance, thou go backward,
moving thy wings, believing to advance,
it is needful that grace be obtained by prayer;
grace from her who has the power to aid thee;
and do thou follow me with thy affection
so that thy heart depart not from my speech.”
And he began this holy supplication.
