Fixed in affection upon his Delight, that contemplator freely assumed the office of a teacher, and began these holy words:
“The wound which Mary closed up and anointed, she who is so beautiful at her feet is she who opened it and who pierced it.
Beneath her, in the order which the third seats make, sits Rachel with Beatrice, as thou seest.
Sara, Rebecca, Judith, and she who was great-grandmother of the singer who, through sorrow for his sin, said Miserere mei,
thou mayest see thus from step to step in gradation downward, as with the name of each I go downward through the rose from leaf to leaf.
And from the seventh row downwards, even as down to it, Hebrew women follow in succession, dividing all the tresses of the flower;
because these are the wall by which the sacred stairways are separated according to the look which faith turned on Christ.
On this side, where the flower is mature with all its leaves, are seated those who believed in Christ about to come.
On the other side, where the semicircles are broken by empty spaces, are those who turned their faces on Christ already come.
And as on this side the glorious seat of the Lady of Heaven, and the other seats below it, make so great a division,
thus, opposite, does that of the great John, who, ever holy, endured the desert and martyrdom, and then Hell for two years;
and beneath him Francis and Benedict and Augustine and others are allotted thfis to divide, far down as here from circle to circle.
Now behold the high divine foresight; for one and the other aspect of the faith will fill this garden equally.
And know that downwards from the row which midway cleaves the two divisions, they are seated for no merit of their own,
but for that of others, under certain conditions; for all these are spirits absolved ere they had true election.
Well canst thou perceive it by their looks, and also by their childish voices, if thou lookest well upon them and if thou listenest to them.
Now thou art perplexed, and in perplexity art silent; but I will loose for thee the strong bond in which thy subtile thoughts fetter thee.
Within the amplitude of this realm a casual point can have no place, any more than sadness, or thirst, or hunger;
for whatever thou seest is established by eternal law, so that here the ring answers exactly to the finger.
And therefore this folk, hastened to true life, is not sine causa more and less excellent here among itself.
The King through whom this realm reposes in such great love and in such great delight that no will is venturesome for more,
creating all the minds in His own glad aspect, diversely endows with grace according to His own pleasure; and here let the fact suffice.
And this is expressly and clearly noted for you in the Holy Scripture in those twins who, while within their mother, had their anger roused.
Therefore, according to the color of the hair of such grace, it behoves the highest light befittingly to crown them.
Without, then, merit from their modes of Efe, they are placed in different grades, differing only in their primary keenness of vision.
Thus in the fresh centuries the faith of parents alone sufficed, together with innocence, to secure salvation.
After the first ages were, complete, it was needful for males with their innocent plumage to acquire virtue through circumcision.
But after the time of grace had come, without perfect baptism in Christ, such minocence was kept there below.
“Look now upon the face which most resembles Christ, for only its brightness can prepare thee to see Christ.”
I saw raining upon her such great joy borne in the holy minds created to fly across through that height,
that whatsoever I had seen before had not rapt me with such great admiration, nor shown to me such likeness to God.
And that love which had first descended there, singing “Ave, Maria, gratia plena,” in front of her spread wide his wings.
The blessed Court responded to the divine song from all parts, so that every countenance became thereby serener.
“O holy Father, who for me submittest to be below here, leaving the sweet place in which thou sittest through eternal allotment,
who is that Angel who with such jubilee looks into the eyes of our Queen, so enamoured that he seems of fire?”
Thus I again had recourse to the teaching of him who was made beautiful by Mary, as the morning star by the sun.
And he to me, “Confidence and grace as much as there can be in Angel and in soul, axe all in him, and so we would have it be,
for he it is who bore the palm down to Mary, when the Son of God willed to load Himself with our burden.
But come now with thine eyes, as I shall go on speaking, and note the great patricians of this most just and pious empire.
Those two who sit there above, most happy through being nearest to the Empress, are, as it were, the two roots of this rose.
He who on the left is close to her is the Father through whose rash taste the human race tastes so much bitterness.
On the right thou seest that ancient Father of Holy Church, to whom Christ entrusted the keys of this lovely flower.
And he who saw before his death all the heavy times of the beautiful bride, who was won with the lance and with the nails,
sits at his side; and alongside the other rests that leader, under whom the ingrate, fickle and stubborn people lived on manna.
Opposite Peter thou seest Anna sitting, so content to gaze upon her daughter, that she moves not her eyes while singing Hosannah;
and opposite the eldest father of a family sits Lucia, who moved thy Lady, when thou didst bend thy brow to rush downward.
“But because the time flies which holds thee slumbering, here will we make a stop, like a good tailor who makes the gown according as he has cloth,
and we will direct our eyes to the First Love, so that, looking towards Him, thou mayst penetrate so far as is possible through His effulgence.
Truly, lest perchance, moving thy wings, thou go backward, believing to advance, it is needful that grace be obtained by prayer;
grace from her who has the power to aid thee; and do thou follow me with thy affection so that thy heart depart not from my speech.”
And he began this holy supplication.
