Virgin Mother, daughter of thine own Son, humble and exalted more than any creature, fixed term of the eternal counsel,
thou art she who didst so ennoble human nature that its own Maker disdained not to become His own making.
Within thy womb was rekindled the Love through whose warmth this flower has thus blossomed in the eternal peace.
Here thou art to us the noonday torch of charity, and below, among mortals, thou art the living fount of hope.
Lady, thou art so great, and so availest, that whoso wishes grace, and has not recourse to thee, wishes his desire to fly without wings.
Thy benignity not only succors him who asks, but oftentimes freely foreruns the asking.
In thee mercy, in thee pity, in thee magnificence, in thee whatever of goodness is in any creature, are united.
Now doth this man, who, from the lowest abyss of the universe, far even as here, has seen one by one the lives of spirits,
supplicate thee, through grace, for virtue such that he may be able with his eyes to uplift himself higher toward the Ultimate Salvation.
And I, who never for my own vision burned more than I do for his, proffer to thee all my prayers, and pray that they be not scant,
that with thy prayers thou wouldest dissipate for him every cloud of his mortality, so that the Supreme Pleasure may be displayed to him.
Further I pray thee, Queen, who canst whatso thou wilt, that, after so great a vision, thou wouldest preserve his affections sound.
May thy guardianship vanquish human impulses. Behold Beatrice with all the Blessed for my prayers clasp their hands to thee.
The eyes beloved and revered by God, fixed on the speaker, showed to us how pleasing unto her are devout prayers.
Then to the Eternal Light were they directed, on which it is not to be believed that eye so clear is turned by any creature.
And I, who to the end of all desires was approaching, even as I ought, ended within myself the ardor of my longing.
Bernard was beckoning to me, and was smiling, that I should look upward; but I was already, of my own accord, such as he wished;
for my sight, becoming pure, was entering more and more through the radiance of the lofty Light which of itself is true.
Thenceforward my vision was greater than our speech, which yields to such a sight, and the memory yields to such excess.
In matter-moulded forms of speech,
Or ev'n for intellect to reach
Thro' memory that which I became.”
—In Memoriam, XCV.
As is he who dreaming sees, and after the dream the passion remains imprinted, and the rest returns not to the mind, such am I; for my vision almost wholly fails, while the sweetness that was born of it yet distils within my heart. Thus the snow is by the sun unsealed;
thus on the wind, in the light leaves, was lost the saying of the Sibyl.
O Supreme Light, that so high upliftest Thyself from mortal conceptions, re-lend a little to my mind of what Thou didst appear,
and make my tongue so powerful that it may be able to leave one single spark of Thy glory for the future people;
for, by returning somewhat to my memory and by sounding a little in these verses, more of Thy victory shall be conceived.
I think that by the keenness of the living ray which I endured, I should have been bewildered if my eyes had been averted from it.
And it comes to my mind that for this reason I was the more hardy to sustain so much, that I joined my look unto the Infinite Goodness.
O abundant Grace, whereby I presumed to fix my eyes through the Eternal Light so far that there I consumed my sight!
In its depth I saw that whatsoever is dispersed through the universe is there included, bound with love in one volume;
substance and accidents and their modes, fused together, as it were, in such wise, that that of which I speak is one simple Light.
The universal form of this knot I believe that I saw, because in saying this I feel that I more at large rejoice.
One instant only is greater oblivion for me than five and twenty centuries to the emprise which made Neptune wonder at the shadow of Argo.
Thus my mind, wholly rapt, was gazing fixed, motionless, and intent, and ever with gazing grew enkindled.
In that Light one becomes such that it is impossible he should ever consent to turn himself from it for other sight;
because the Good which is the object of the will is all collected in it, and outside of it that is defective which is perfect there.
Now will my speech be shorter, even in respect to that which I remember, than an infant's who still bathes his tongue at the breast.
Not because more than one simple semblance was in the Living Light wherein I was gazing, which is always such as it was before;
but through my sight, which was growing strong in me as I looked, one sole appearance, as I myself changed, was altering itself to me.
Within the profound and clear subsistence of the lofty Light appeared to me three circles of three colors and of one dimension;
and one appeared reflected by the other, as Iris by Iris, and the third appeared fire which from the one and from the other is equally breathed forth.
O how short is the telling, and how feeble toward my conception! and this toward what I saw is such that it suffices not to call it little.
O Light Eternal, that sole dwellest in Thyself, sole understandest Thyself, and, by Thyself understood and understanding, lovest and smilest on Thyself!
That circle, which, thus conceived, appeared in Thee as a reflected light, being somewhile regarded by my eyes,
seemed to me depicted within itself, of its own very color, by our effigy, wherefore my sight was wholly set upon it.
As is the geometer who wholly applies himself to measure the circle, and finds not by thinking that principle of which he is in need,
such was I at that new sight. I wished to see how the image accorded with the circle, and how it has its place therein;
but my own wings were not for this, had it not been that my mind was smitten by a flash in which its wish came.
To my high fantasy here power failed; but now my desire and my will, like a wheel which evenly is moved, was turning
the Lovee which moves the Sun and the other stars
