Now goeth on along a narrow path
between the wall of the city and the torments
my Master, and I behind his shoulders.
“O Virtue supreme, that through the impious circles
turnest me,” I began, “according to thy pleasure,
speak to me and satisfy my desires.
The folk that are lying in the sepulchres,
can they be seen? are now lifted,
All the lids, and no one keepeth guard.”
And he to me, “All shall be locked in
when from Jehoshaphat they shall here return
with the bodies which they have left on earth.
Upon this side have their burial place.
Epicurus with all his followers,
who make the soul mortal with the body,
Therefore as to the demand that thou makest of me,
thou shalt soon be satisfied here within;
and also as to the desire concerning which thou art silent to me.”
And I, “Good Leader, I hold not my heart hidden
from thee except in order to speak little;
and not only now to that hast thou disposed me.”
O Tuscan, who through the city of fire
alive art going, speaking thus modestly,
may it please thee to stop in this place.
Thy speech makes manifest
that thou art native of that noble fatherland
to which perchance I was too molestful.”
Suddenly this sound issued
from one of the coffers, wherefore I drew,
in fear, a little nearer to my Leader.
And he said to me, “Turn, what dost thou?
Behold Farinata who hath uprisen;
thou shalt see him all from the girdle up.”
I had already fixed my face on his,
and he straightened himself up with breast and front
as though he had Hell in great scorn.
And the bold and ready hands of my Leader
pushed me among the sepulchres to him,
saying, “Let thy words be choice.”
When I was at the foot of his tomb,
he looked at me a little, and then, as though disdainful,
asked me, “Who were thy ancestors?”
I, who was desirous to obey,
concealed them not, but disclosed them all to him;
whereon he raised his brows a little up,
then said, “Fiercely were they adverse
to me, and to my fathers, and to my party,
so that twice I scattered them.”
“If they were driven out, they returned from every side,”
replied I to him,
“both one and the other time, but yours have not learned well that art.”
Then there arose, to view uncovered
a shade at the side of this one, down to the chin;
I think that it had risen on its knees.
Round about me it looked, as if it had desire
to see if another were with me,
but when its expectancy was quite extinct,
weeping it said, “If through this blind
dungeon thou goest through loftiness of genius,
my son, where is he? and why is he not with thee?”
And I to him, “Of myself I come not;
he who waits yonder leads me through here,
whom perchance your Guido held in scorn.”
His words and the mode of the punishment
had already read to me the name of this one,
wherefore my answer was so full.
Suddenly straightening up, he cried, “How?”
didst thou say, ‘he held’? lives he not still?
doth not the sweet light strike his eyes?”
When he took note of some delay
that I made before answering,
he fell again supine, and forth appeared no more.
But that other magnanimous one, at whose instance
I had stayed, changed not aspect,
nor moved his neck, nor bent his side.
“And if,” continuing his first words,
he said, “they have ill learned that art,
it torments me more than this bed.
But will not be rekindled fifty times
the face of the lady who ruleth here
ere thou shalt know how much that art weighs.
And, so mayest thou return unto the sweet world,
tell me wherefore is that people so pitiless
against my race in its every law?”
Then I to him, “The rout and the great carnage
that colored the Arbia red
cause such orison to be made in our temple.”
After he had, sighing, shaken his head,
“In that I was not alone,” he said, “nor surely
without cause would I have moved with the rest;
but I was alone,—there where it was agreed
by every one to lay Florence waste,—
he who defended her with open face.”
“Ah! so hereafter may your seed repose,”
I prayed to him, “loose for me that knot,
which here has entangled my judgment.
It seems, if I rightly hear,
that ye foresee that which time is bringing with him,
and as to the present have another way.”
“We see,” “like those who have feeble light,
the things that are far from us, he said,
so much still shineth on us the supreme Leader;
when they draw near, or are, all is vain
our intelligence; and, if some one report not to us,
we know nothing of your human state.
Therefore thou canst comprehend that our knowledge will be utterly dead
from that moment
when the gate of the future shall he closed.”
Then, as compunctious for my fault
I said, “Now wilt thou therefore tell that fallen one
that his son is still conjoined with the living,
and if just now I was dumb to answer,
make him know that I was so because
I was still thinking in that error which you have solved for me.”
And now my Master was calling me back,
wherefore I prayed the spirit more hastily
that he would tell me who was with him.
He said to me, “Here with more than a thousand do I lie;
here within is the second Frederick
and the Cardinal, and of the others I am silent.”
Thereon he hid himself; and I toward the ancient
Poet turned my steps, reflecting
on that speech which seemed hostile to me.
He moved on, and then, thus going,
he said to me, “Why art thou so distraught?”
And I satisfied his demand.
“Let thy memory preserve that which thou hast heard
against thyself,” commanded me that Sage;
“and now attend to this,” and he raised his finger.
“When thou shalt be in presence of the sweet radiance
of her whose beautiful eye sees everything,
from her thou shalt learn the journey of thy life.”
Then to the left he turned his step.
We left the wall, and went toward the middle
by a path which strikes into a valley
that even up there its stench made displeasing.
