Oh Simon Magus! Oh ye his wretched followers,
who, the things of God
that ought to be the brides of righteousness, rapacious,
do prostitute for gold and silver,
now it behoves for you the trumpet sound,
since ye are in the third pit!
Already were we come to the next tomb,
mounted on that part of the crag
which just above the middle of the ditch hangs plumb.
Oh Supreme Wisdom, how great is the art
that Thou displayest in Heaven, on Earth, and in the Evil World!
and how justly doth Thy Power distribute!
I saw along the sides, and over the bottom,
the livid stone full of holes
all of one size, and each was circular.
They seemed to me not less wide nor larger
than those that in my beautiful Saint John
are made as place for the baptizers
one of which, not many years ago,
I broke for sake of one who was stifling in it;
and be this the seal to undeceive all men.
Forth from the mouth of each protruded
the feet of a sinner, and his legs
up to the calf, and the rest was within.
The soles of all were both on fire,
wherefore their joints quivered so violently
that they would have snapped withes and bands.
As the flaming of things oiled is wont
to move only on the outer surface,
so was it there from the heels to the toes.
“Who is he, Master, that writhes,
quivering more than the others his consorts,”
said I, “and whom a ruddier flame is sucking?”
And he to me, “If thou wilt that I carry thee
there down by that bank which slopes the most,
from him thou shalt know of himself and of his wrongs.”
And I, “Whatever pleaseth thee even so is good to me.
Thou art Lord, and knowest that I part me not
from thy will, and thou knowest that which is unspoken.”
Then we went upon the fourth dyke,
turned, and descended on the left hand,
down to the bottom pierced with holes, and narrow.
And the good Master yet from his haunch,
set me not down till he brought me to the cleft
of him who was thus lamenting with his shanks.
“O whoe’er thou art, that keepest upside down,
sad soul, planted like a stake,”
I began to say, “speak, if thou canst.”
I was standing like the friar who confesses
the perfidious assassin, who, after he is fixed,
recalls him, in order to delay his death.
And he cried out, “Art thou already standing there?
Art thou already standing there, Boniface?
By several years the record lied to me.
Art thou so quickly sated with that having,
for which thou didst not fear to seize by guile
the beautiful Lady, and then to do her outrage?”
Such I became as those that stand,
not comprehending that which is replied to them,
as if mocked, and know not what to answer.
Then Virgil said, “Tell him quickly,
I am not he, I am not he thou thinkest.”
And I answered as was enjoined on me;
whereat the spirit quite twisted his feet.
Thereafter, sighing and with tearful voice,
he said to me, “Then what dost thou require of me?
If to know who I am concerneth thee so much
that thou hast crossed the bank therefor,
know that I was vested with the Great Mantle;
and verily I was a son of the She-Bear,
so eager to advance the cubs,
that up there I put wealth, and here myself, into the purse.
Beneath my head are stretched the others
that preceded me in simony,
flattened through the fissures of the rock.
There below shall I likewise sink, when
he shall come whom I believed thou wert,
then when I put to thee the sudden question;
but already the time is longer that I have cooked my feet,
and that I have been thus upside down,
than he will stay planted with red feet;
for after him will come, of uglier deed,
from westward, a shepherd without law,
such as must cover him and me again.
A new Jason will he be, of whom it is read
in Maccabees; and as to that one was compliant
his king, so unto this he who rules France shall be.
I know not if here I was too audacious
that I only answered him in this strain,
“Pray now tell me how much treasure
our Lord desired of Saint Peter
before he placed the keys in his keeping?
Surely he required nothing save ‘Follow me.’
Nor did Peter or the others require of Matthias
gold or silver, when he was chosen
to the place which the guilty soul had lost.
Therefore stay thou, for thou art rightly punished,
and guard well the ill-gotten money
that against Charles made thee to be bold.
And were it not that still forbiddeth me
reverence for the Supreme Keys
that thou heldest in the glad life,
I would use words still more grave;
for your avarice saddens the world,
trampling down the good and exalting the bad.
Of you shepherds the Evangelist was aware,
when she that sitteth upon the waters was seen by him
to fornicate with kings:
that woman that was born with the seven heads,
and from the ten horns had evidence,
so long as virtue pleased her spouse.
Ye have made you a god of gold and silver:
and what difference is there between you and the idolater
save that he worships one and ye a hundred?
Ah Constantine! of how much ill was mother,
not thy conversion, but that dowry
which the first rich Father received from thee!”
And, while I was singing these notes to him,
whether anger or conscience stung him,
he violently quivered with both feet.
I believe, forsooth, that it had pleased my Leader,
with so contented look be listened ever
to the sound of the true words uttered.
Thereupon with both his arms he took me,
and when he had me wholly on his breast,
remounted on the way by which he had descended.
Nor did he tire of holding me clasped,
till he had borne me up to the summit of the arch
which is the passage from the fourth to the fifth dyke.
Here softly he laid down his burden,
softly because of the ragged and steep crag,
that would be a difficult pass for goats.
Thence another great valley was discovered to me.
