Of a new punishment needs must I make verses,
and give matetial to the twentieth canto
of the first lay, which is of the submerged.
I was now wholly set
on looking into the disclosed depth
that was bathed with tears of anguish,
and I saw folk through the circular valley,
coming, silent and weeping, at the pace
at which lltanies go in this world.
As my sight descended deeper among them,
each appeared marvelously distorted
from the chin to the beginning of the chest;
for toward their reins their face was turned,
and they must needs go backwards,
because they were deprived of looking forward.
Perchance sometimes by force of palsy
one has been thus completely twisted,
but I never saw it, nor do I think it can be.
So may God let thee, Reader, gather fruit
from thy reading, now think for thyself
how I could keep my face dry,
when I saw our image near by
so contorted that the weeping of the eyes
bathed the buttocks along the cleft.
Truly I wept, leaning on one of the rocks
of the hard crag, so that my Guide
said to me, “Art thou also one of the fools?
Here pity liveth when it is quite dead.
Who is more wicked than he
who feels compassion at the Divine Judgment?
Lift up thy head, lift up, and see him for whom
the earth opened before the eyes of the Thebans,
whereon they shouted all, ‘Whither art thou rushing,
Amphiaraus? Why dost thou leave the war?’
And he stopped not from falling headlong down
far as Minos, who seizes hold of every one.
Look, how he has made a breast of his shoulders!
Because he wished to see too far before him,
he looks behind and makes a backward path.
See Tiresias, who changed his semblance,
when from a male he became a female,
his members all of them being transformed;
and afterwards was obliged to strike once more
the two entwined serpents with his rod,
ere he could regain his masculine plumage.
Aruns is he that to this one’s belly has his back,
who on the mountains of Luni
(where grubs the Carrarese who dwells beneath),
had amid white marbles a cave
for his abode, whence for looking at the stars
and the sea his view was not cut off.
“And she who covers her breasts,
which thou dost not see, with her loose tresses,
and has on that side all her hairy skin,
was Manto, who sought through many lands,
then settled there where I was born;
whereof it pleases me that thou listen a little to me.
After her father had departed from life,
and the city of Bacchus had become enslaved,
long while she wandered through the world.
Up in fair Italy lies a lake,
at foot of the alp that shuts in Germany
above Tyrol, and it is called Benaco.
Through a thousand founts, I think, and more,
the Apennine between Garda and Val Camonica is bathed
by the water which settles in that lake.
Midway is a place where the Trentine
Pastor and he of Brescia and the Veronese
might each give his blessing if he took that road.
Peschiera, fortress fair and strong, sits
to confront the Brescians and Bergamasques,
where the shore round about is lowest.
Thither needs must fall all that which
in the lap of Benaco cannot stay,
and it becomes a river down through the verdant pastures.
Soon as the water gathers head to run,
no longer is it called Benaco, but Mincio,
far as Governo, where it falls into the Po.
No long course it hath before it finds a plain,
on which it spreads, and makes a marsh,
and is wont in summer sometimes to be noisome.
Passing that way, the cruel virgin
saw a land in the middle of the fen
without culture and bare of inhabitants
There, to avoid all human fellowship,
she stayed with her servants to practice her arts,
and lived, and left there her empty body.
Afterward the men who were scattered round about
gathered to that place, which was strong
because of the fen which surrounded it
They built the city over those dead hones,
and for her, who first had chosen the place,
they called it Mantua, without other augury.
Of old its people were more thick within it,
before the stupidity of Casalodi
had been tricked by Pinamonte.
Therefore I warn thee, that if thou ever hearest
the origin of my town, otherwise
no falsehood may defraud the truth.”
And I, “Master, thy discourses
are so certain to me, and so lay hold on my faith,
that the others would be to me as dead embers.
But tell me of the people who are passing,
if thou seest any one of them worthy of note;
for only unto that my mind reverts.”
Then he said to me, “That one, who from his cheek
stretches his beard upon his dusky shoulders,
was an augur when Greece was so emptied of males
that they scarce remained for the cradles,
and with Calchas he gave the moment
at Aulis for cutting the first cable.
Eurypylus was his name, and thus
my lofty Tragedy sings him in some place;
well knowest thou this, who knowest the whole of it.
That other who is so small in the flanks
was Michael Scott, who verily
knew the game of magical deceptions.
See Guido Bonatti, see Asdente,
he had attended to his leather and his thread,
who now would wish, but late repents.
See the forlorn women who left the needle,
the spool, and the spindle, and became fortune-tellers;
they wrought spells with herb and with image.
But come on now, for already holds the confines
of both the hemispheres, and touches the wave
below Seville Cain with his thorns.
And already yesternight was the moon round;
well shouldst thou remember it, for it did thee no harm
sometimes in the deep wood.”
Thus he spoke to me, and we went on the while.
