So from bridge to bridge, speaking other things,
which my Comedy careth not to sing,
we went, and held the summit, when
we stopped to see the next cleft
of Malebolge and the next vain lamentations;
and I saw it wonderfully dark.
As in the Arsenal of the Venetians,
in winter, the sticky pitch
for smearing their unsound vessels is boiling,
because they cannot go to sea, and, instead thereof,
one builds him a new bark, and one caulks
the sides of that which hath made many a voyage;
one hammers at the prow, and one at the stern;
another makes oars, and another twists the cordage;
and one the foresail and the mainsail patches,—
so, not by fire, but by divine art,
a thick pitch was boiling there below,
which belimed the bank on every side.
I saw it, but saw not in it
aught but the bubbles which the boiling raised,
and all of it swelling up and again sinking compressed.
While I was gazing down there fixedly,
my Leader, saying, “Take heed! take heed!”
drew me to himself from the place where I was standing.
Then I turned as one who is slow
to see what it behoves him to fly,
and whom a sudden fear unnerves,
and delays not to depart in order to see.
And I saw behind us a black devil
come running up along the crag.
Ah! how fell he was in aspect,
and how rough he seemed to me in action,
with wings open, and light upon his feet!
His shoulder, which was sharp and high,
was laden by a sinner with both haunches,
the sinew of whose feet he held clutched.
“O Malebranche of our bridge,” he said,
“lo, one of the Ancients of Saint Zita
put him under, for I return again
to that city, which I have furnished well with them;
every man there is a barrator, except Bonturo:
there, for money, of No they make Ay.”
He hurled him down, and along the hard crag
he turned, and never was mastiff loosed
in such haste to follow a thief.
That one sank under, and came up back uppermost,
but the demons that had shelter of the bridge
cried out, “Here the Holy Face avails not;
here one swims otherwise than in the Serchio;
therefore, if thou dost not want our grapples,
make no show above the pitch.”
Then they struck him with more than a hundred prongs,
and said, “Covered must thou dance here,
so that, if thou canst, thou mayst swindle secretly.”
Not otherwise cooks make their scullions
plunge into the middle of the cauldron,
the meat with their hooks, so that it may not float.
The good Master, “In order that it be not apparent
that thou art here,” said to me, “crouch down
behind a splinter, that may afford some screen to thee,
and at any offense that may be done to me
be not afraid, for I have knowledge of these things,
because another time I was at such a fray.”
Then he passed on beyond the head of the bridge,
and when he arrived upon the sixth bank,
he had need of a steadfast front.
With such fury and with such storm,
as dogs run out upon the poor wretch,
who of a sudden begs where he stops,
they came forth from under the little bridge,
and turned against him all their forks.
But he cried out, “Be no one of you savage;
ere your hook take hold of me,
let one of you come forward that he may hear me,
and then take counsel as to grappling me.”
All cried out, “Let Malacoda go!”
Whereon one moved, and the rest stood still;
and he came toward him, saying, “What doth this avail him?”
“Thinkest thou, Malacoda, to see me
come here,” said my Master,
“safe hitherto from all your hindrances,
except by Will Divine and fate propitious?
Let us go on, for in Heaven it is willed
that I show another this savage road.”
Then was his arrogance so fallen
that he let the hook drop at his feet,
and said to the rest, “Now let him not be struck.”
And my Leader to me, “O thou that sittest
cowering among the splinters of the bridge,
securely now return to me.”
Whereat I moved and came swiftly to him.
And the devils all pressed forward,
so that I feared they would not keep their compact.
And thus I once saw the foot-soldiers afraid,
who came out under pledge from Caprona,
seeing themselves among so many enemies.
I drew with my whole body alongside my Leader,
and turned not mine eyes
from their look, which was not good.
They lowered their forks, and, “Wilt thou that I touch
him on the rump?” said one to the other,
and they answered, “Yes, see thou nick it for him.”
But that demon who was holding speech
with my Leader turned very quickly
and said, “Stay, stay, Scarmiglione!”
Then he said to us, “Further advance along this
crag there cannot be, because the sixth arch lies
all shattered at the bottom.
And if to go forward still is your pleasure,
go on along this rocky bank;
near by is another crag that affords a way.
Yesterday, five hours later than this hour,
one thousand two hundred and sixty-six
years were complete since the way was broken here.
I am sending thitherward some of these of mine,
to see if any one is airing himself;
go ye with them, for they will not be wicked.
Come forward, Alichino and Calcabrina,”
began he to say, “and thou, Cagnazzo;
and do thou, Barbariccia, guide the ten.
Let Libicocco come also, and Draghignazzo,
tusked Ciriatto, and Graffiacane
and Farfarello, and mad Rubicante.
Search round about the boiling pitch;
let these be safe far as the next crag,
that all unbroken goes over these dens.”
“O me! Master, what is it that I see?”
said I; “pray let us go alone without escort,
if thou knowest the way, for I desire it not for myself.
If thou art as wary as thou art wont to be,
dost thou not see that they show their teeth,
and threaten harm to us with their brows?”
And he to me, “I would not have thee afraid.
Let them grin on at their will,
for they are doing it at the boiled wretches.”
Upon the left bank they wheeled round,
but first each had pressed his tongue with his teeth
toward their leader for a signal,
and he had made a trumpet of his rump.
