At the end of his words the thief
raised his hands with both the figs,
crying, “Take that, God! for at thee I square them.”
Thenceforth the serpents were my friends,
for then one coiled around his neck,
as if it said, “I will not that thou say more,”
and another round his arms and bound them up anew,
clinching itself so in front
that he could not give a shake with them.
Ah Pistoia! Pistoia! why dost thou not decree
to make ashes of thyself, so that thou mayest last no longer,
since in evil-doing thou surpassest thine own seed?
Through all the dark circles of Hell
I saw no spirit against God so proud,
not he who fell at Thebes down from the walls.
He fled away and spake no word more.
And I saw a Centaur full of rage
come crying out, “Where is, where is that obdurate one?”
I do not think Maremma has so many
snakes as he had upon his croup
up to where our semblance begins.
On his shoulders behind the nape
a dragon with open wings was lying upon him,
and it sets on fire whomsoever it encounters.
My Master said, “This is Cacus,
who beneath the rock of Mount Aventine
made oftentimes a lake of blood.
He goes not on one road with his brothers
because of the fraudulent theft he committed
of the great herd that was in his neighborhood;
wherefor his crooked deeds ceased
under the club of Hercules, who perhaps
dealt him a hundred blows with it, and he felt not ten.”
While he was so speaking, and that one had run by,
lo! three spirits came below us,
of whom neither I nor my Leader was aware
till when they cried out, “Who are ye?”
whereon our story stopped,
and we then attended only unto them.
I did not recognize them, but it happened,
as it is wont to happen by chance,
that one must needs name the other,
saying, “Cianfa, where can he have stayed?”
Whereupon I, in order that the Leader should attend,
put my finger upward from my chin to my nose.
If thou art now, Reader, slow to credit
that which I shall tell, it will not be a marvel,
for I who saw it hardly admit it to myself.
As I was holding my brow raised upon them, lo!
a serpent with six feet darts
in front of one, and grapples close to him.
With his middle feet he clasped his paunch,
and with his forward took his arms,
then struck his fangs in one and the other cheek.
His hinder feet he stretched upon the thighs,
and put his tail between the two,
and behind bent it up along the reins.
Ivy was never so bearded
to a tree, as the horrible beast
through the other’s limbs entwined his own.
Then they stuck together, as if of hot wax
they had been, and mingled their color;
nor one nor the other seemed now that which it was;
even as before the flame,
up along the paper a dark color proceeds
which is not yet black, and the white dies away.
The other two were looking on, and each
cried, “O me! Agnello, how thou changest!
Lo, now thou art neither two nor one!
Now were the two heads become one,
when there appeared to us two countenances mixed
in one face wherein the two were lost.
Of four strips the two arms were made;
the thighs with the legs, the belly and the chest
became members that were never seen before.
Each original aspect there was cancelled;
both and neither the perverse image
appeared, and such it went away with slow step.
As the lizard under the great scourge
of the dog days, changing from hedge to hedge,
seems a flash, if it crosses the way,
so seemed, coming toward the belly
of the two others, a little fiery serpent,
livid, and black as a grain of pepper.
And that part whereby is first taken
our nourishment, it transfixed in one of them,
then fell down stretched out before him.
The transfixed one gazed at it, but said nothing;
nay rather, with feet fixed, he yawned
even as if sleep or fever had assailed him.
He looked at the serpent, and that at him;
one through his wound, the other through his mouth,
smoked violently, and their smoke met.
Let Lucan henceforth be silent, where he tells
of the wretched Sabellus, and of Nasidius,
and wait to hear that which now is uttered.
Let Ovid be silent concerning Cadmus and Arethusa,
for if, poetizing, he converts him into a serpent and her into a fountain,
I envy him not;
for two natures front to front
never did he transmute, so that both the forms
were prompt to exchange their matter.
To one another they responded by such rules,
that the serpent made his tail into a fork,
and the wounded one drew together his feet.
The legs and the very thighs with them
so stuck together, that in short while the juncture
made no sign that was apparent.
The cleft tail took on the shape
that was lost there, and its skin
became soft, and that of the other hard.
I saw the arms draw in through the armpits,
and the two feet of the beast which were short
lengthen out in proportion as those shortened.
Then the hinder feet, twisted together,
became the member that man conceals,
and the wretched one from his had two stretched forth.
While the smoke is veiling both with a new color,
and generates hair on the one,
and from the other strips it,
one rose up, and the other fell down,
not however turning aside their pitiless lights,
beneath which each was changing his visage.
He who was erect drew his in toward the temples,
and, from the excess of material that came in there,
issued the ears on the smooth cheeks;
that which did not run backwards but was retained,
of its superfluity made a nose for the face,
and thickened the lips so far as was needful.
He who was lying down drives his muzzle forward,
and draws in his ears through his skull,
as the snail doth his horns.
And his tongue, which erst was united and fit for speech,
cleaves itself, and the forked one
of the other closes up; and the smoke stops.
The soul that had become a brute
fled hissing along the valley,
and behind him the other speaking spits.
Then he turned upon him his new shoulders,
and said to the other, “I will that Buoso run,
as I have done, groveling along this path.”
Thus I saw the seventh ballast
change and rechange, and here let
the novelty be my excuse, if my pen straggle a little.
And although my eyes confused
were somewhat, and my mind bewildered,
those could not flee away so covertly
but that I clearly distinguished Puccio Sciancato,
and he it was who alone, of the three companions
that had first come, was not changed;
the other was he whom thou, Gaville, weepest.
