Now was the flame erect and quiet,
through not speaking more, and now was going from us,
with the permission of the sweet poet,
when another that was coming behind it
made us turn our eyes to its tip,
by a confused sound that issued forth therefrom.
As the Sicilian bull—that bellowed first
with the plaint of him (and that was right)
who had shaped it with his file—
was wont to bellow with the voice of the sufferer,
so that, although it was of brass,
yet it appeared transfixed with pain,
thus, through not having way or outlet
at first from the fire, into its language
were converted the disconsolate words.
But when they had taken their course
up through the point, giving it that vibration
which the tongue had given in their passage,
we heard say, “O thou, to whom I direct
my voice, thou that wast just speaking Lombard,
saying, ‘Now go thy way, no more I urge thee,’
although I may have arrived perchance somewhat late,
let it not irk thee to stop to speak with me,
behold, it irks not me, and I am burning.
If thou but now into this blind world
art fallen from that sweet Italian land
whence I bring all my sin,
tell me if the Romagnuoli have peace or war;
for I was from the mountains there between Urbino
and the chain from which Tiber is unlocked.”
I was still downward attent and leaning over
when my Leader touched me on the side,
saying, “Speak thou, this is an Italian.”
And I, who even now had my answer ready,
without delay began to speak,
“O soul, that art hidden there below,
thy Romagna is not, and never was,
without war in the hearts of her tyrants,
but open war none have I left there now.
Ravenna is as it hath been for many years;
the eagle of Polenta is brooding there,
so that he covers Cervia with his wings.
The city that made erewhile the long struggle,
and of the French a bloody heap,
finds itself again beneath the green paws.
And the old mastiff and the new of Verrucchio,
who made the ill disposal of Montagna,
there where they are wont make an anger of their teeth.
the city of Lamone and of Santerno,
The little lion of the white lair governs
and changes side from summer to winter.
And she whose flank the Savio bathes,
even as she sits between the plain and the mountain,
lives between tyranny and a free state.
Now who thou art, I pray thee that thou tell us;
be not harder than another hath been,
so may thy name in the world hold front.”
After the fire had somewhat roared
according to its fashion, the sharp point moved
this way and that, and then gave forth this breath:
“If I could believe that my answer might be
to a person who should ever return unto the world,
this flame would stand without more quiverings;
but inasmuch as, never from this depth
did any living man return, if I hear truth,
without fear of infamy I answer thee.
“I was a man of arms, and then became a cordelier,
trusting, thus girt, to make amends;
and surely my trust had been fulfilled
but for the Great Priest, whom may ill betide!
who set me back into my first sins;
and how and wherefore, I will that thou hear from me.
While I was that form of bone and flesh
that my mother gave me, my works
were not leonine, but of the fox.
The wily practices, and the covert ways,
I knew them all, and I so plied their art,
that to the earth’s end the sound went forth.
When I saw me arrived at that part
of my age where every one ought to
strike the sails and to coil up the ropes,
what erst was pleasing to me then gave me pain,
and I yielded me repentant and confessed.
Alas me wretched! and it would have availed.
The Prince of the new Pharisees
having war near the Lateran,—
and not with Saracens nor with Jews,
for every enemy of his was Christian,
and none of them had been to conquer Acre,
nor a trafficker in the land of the Soldan,—
neither his supreme office, nor the holy orders,
regarded in himself, nor in me that cord
which is wont to make those girt with it more lean;
but as Constantine besought Sylvester
within Soracte to cure his leprosy,
so this one besought me as master
to cure his proud fever.
He asked counsel of me, and I kept silence,
because his words seemed drunken.
And then he said to me, ‘Let not thy heart mistrust;
from now I absolve thee, and do thou teach me to act
so that I may throw Palestrina to the ground.
Heaven can I lock and unlock,
as thou knowest; for two are the keys
that my predecessor held not dear.’
Then his grave arguments pushed me
to where silence seemed to me the worst,
and I said, ‘Father, since thou washest me
of that sin wherein I now must fall,
long promise with short keeping
will make thee triumph on the High Seat.’
Francis came afterwards, when I was dead,
for me; but one of the Black Cherubim
said to him, ‘Bear him not away; do me not wrong;
he must come down among my drudges
because he gave the fraudulent counsel,
since which till now I have been at his hair;
for he who repents not cannot be absolved,
nor can repentance and will exist together,
because of the contradiction that allows it not.’
O woeful me! how I shuddered
when he took me, saying to me, ‘Perhaps
thou didst not think that I was a logician.’
To Minos he bore me;
and he twined his tail eight times round his hard back,
and, after he had bitten it in great rage,
he said, ‘This is one of the sinners of the thievish fire.’
Therefore I, where thou seest, am lost,
and going thus robed I rankle.”
When he had thus completed his speech
the flame, sorrowing, departed,
twisting and flapping its sharp horn.
We passed onward, I and my Leader,
along the crag, far as upon the next arch
that covers the ditch in which the fee is paid
by those who, sowing discord, win their burden.
