One and the same tongue first stung me,
so that it tinged both my cheeks,
and then supplied the medicine to me.
Thus do I hear that the lance was wont to
of Achilles and of his father be cause
first of a sad and then of a good gift.
We turned our back to the wretched valley,
up along the bank that girds it round,
crossing without any speech.
Here it was less than night and less than day,
so that my sight went little forward;
but I heard a horn sounding
so loud that it would have made every thunder faint,
following its course counter to it,
which directed my eyes wholly to one place.
Whose smile and frown, like to Achilles’ spear, Is able with the charge to kill and cure. 2 Henry VI. v. i.
After the dolorous rout when Charlemagne lost the holy gest,
Roland sounded not so terribly.
Shortwhile did I carry my head turned thitherward,
when it seemed to me I saw many high towers;
whereon I, “Master, say, what city is this?”
And he to me, “Because too far away thou peerest
through the darkness,
it happens that thou dost err in thy imagining.
Thou shalt see well, if thou arrivest there,
how much the sense at distance is deceived;
therefore somewhat more spur thyself on.”
Then tenderly he took me by the hand,
and said, “Before we go further forward,
in order that the fact may seem less strange to thee,
know that they are not towers, but giants,
and they are in the abyss round about the bank,
from the navel downward, one and all of them.”
Rollanz ad mis l’olifan a sa buche, Empeint le bien, par grant vertut le sunet. Halt sunt li pui e la voiz est mult lunge, Granz xxx. liwes l’oirent-il respundre, Carles l’oit e ses cumpaignes tutes.
Chanson de Roland, 1753-57.
As when the mist is dissipating, the look little by little shapes out what the vapor that thickens the air conceals,
so, as I pierced the gross and dark air
as we drew nearer and nearer to the verge,
error fled from me and fear grew upon me.
For as above its circular enclosure
Montereggione crowns itself with towers,
so the bank that surrounds the abyss
betowered with half their body
the horrible giants
whom Jove still threatens from heaven when he thunders.
And I discerned now the face of one,
his shoulders, and his breast, and great part of his belly,
and down along his sides both his arms.
Nature, surely, when she left the art
of such like creatures, did exceeding well
in taking such executers from Mars;
and if she of elephants and of whales,
repent not, he who looks subtly
holds her more just and more discreet therefor;
for where the faculty of the mind
is added to evil will and to power,
the human race can make no defense against it.
His face seemed to me long and huge
as the pine-cone of St. Peter at Rome,
and in its proportion were his other bones;
so that the bank, which was an apron
from his middle downward, showed of him fully so much
above, that to reach to his hair
three Frieslanders would have made ill vaunt.
For I saw of him thirty great palms
down from the place where one buckles his cloak.
“Raphel mai amech zabi almi,”
the fierce mouth began to cry,
to which sweeter psalms were not befitting.
And my Leader toward him, “Foolish soul!
Keep to thy horn, and with that vent thyself
when anger or other passion touches thee;
seek at thy neck, and thou wilt find the cord
that holds it tied, O soul confused!
and see it lying athwart thy great breast.”
Then he said to me, “He himself accuses himself;
this is Nimrod, because of whose evil thought
the world uses not one language only.
Let us leave him, and let us not speak in vain,
for so is every language to him,
as his to others, which to no one is known.”
we pursued our way,
Then turning to the left, and at a crossbow’s shot
we found the next, far more fierce and larger.
Who the master was for binding him
I cannot tell; but he had
the other in front, and his right arm fastened behind,
by a chain that held him entwined
from the neck downward, so that upon his uncovered part
it was wound as far as the fifth coil.
“This proud one wished to make trial
of his power against the supreme Jove,”
said my Leader, “wherefore he has such reward;
Ephialtes is his name, and he made his great endeavors
when the giants made the Gods afraid;
the arms which he plied he moves nevermore.”
And I to him, “If it may be, I should like
of the huge Briareus
my eyes to have experience.”
Whereon he answered, “Thou shalt see Antaeus
close at hand here, who speaks, and is unbound,
and will set us at the bottom of all sin.
Him whom thou wishest to see is much farther on,
and is bound and fashioned like this one,
save that he seems more ferocious in his look.”
Never was earthquake so mighty
that it shook a tower as violently
as Ephialtes was quick to shake himself.
Then more than ever did I fear death;
and there had been no need of more than the fright,
if I had not seen his bonds.
We then proceeded further forward,
and came to Antaeus, who full five ells,
besides his head, issued forth from the cavern.
O thou that, in the fateful valley
which made Scipio the heir of glory
when Hannibal and his followers turned their backs,
didst bring of old a thousand lions for booty,—
and that hadst thou been at the high war
of thy brothers, it still seems credible
the sons of the Earth would have conquered,—
set us below, and disdain thou not to do so,
where the cold locks up Cocytus.
Make us not go to Tityus, nor to Typhon;
this one can give of that which here is longed for;
therefore stoop, and curl not thy snout.
He yet can restore fame to thee in the world;
for he is living, and still expects long life,
if Grace doth not untimely call him to itself.”
Thus said the Master; and he in haste
stretched out those hands, and took my Leader.
whose strong grip Hercules once felt,
Virgil, when he felt himself taken up,
said to me, “Come hither so that I take thee.”
Then he made one bundle of himself and me.
As the Carisenda seems to look
beneath its leaning side, when a cloud is going
over so that the tower hangs counter to it,
thus seemed Antaeus to me that stood attent
to see him bend; and it was a moment
when I could have wished to go by another road.
But lightly on the bottom that swallows
Lucifer with Judas he set us down;
nor, thus bent, did he there make stay, and like a mast in a ship he raised himself.
And those thin clouds above, in flakes and bars, That give sway their motion to the stars.
