From his savage repast that sinner raised his mouth, wiping it with the hair of the head that he had spoiled behind:
then he began, “Thou willest that I renew a desperate grief that oppresses my heart already only in thinking ere I speak of it.
But, if my words are to be seed that may bear fruit of infamy for the traitor whom I gnaw, thou shalt see me speak and weep at once.
I know not who thou art, nor by what mode thou art come down hither, but Florentine thou seemest to me truly when I hear thee.
Thou hast to know that I was the Count Ugolino and he the Archbishop Ruggieri. Now will I tell thee why I am such a neighbor.
That by the effect of his evil thoughts, I, trusting to him, was taken and then put to death, there is no need to tell.
But that which thou canst not have heard, namely, how cruel was my death, thou shalt hear, and shalt know if he hath wronged me.
“A narrow slit in the mew, which from me has the name of Famine, and in which others yet must be shut up,
had already shown me through its opening many moons, when I had the bad dream that rent for me the veil of the future.
“This one appeared to me master and lord, chasing the wolf and his whelps upon the mountain for which the Pisans cannot see Lucca.
With lean, eager, and trained hounds, Gualandi with Sismondi and with Lanfranchi he had put before him at the front.
After short course, the father and his sons seemed to me weary, and it seemed to me I saw their flanks torn by the sharp fangs.
“When I awoke before the morrow, I heard my sons, who were with me, wailing in their sleep, and asking for bread.
Truly thou art cruel if already thou grievest not, thinking on what my heart foretold; and if thou weepest not, at what art thou wont to weep?
Now they were awake, and the hour drew near when food was wont to be brought to us, and because of his dream each one was apprehensive.
And I heard the door below of the horrible tower locking up; whereat I looked on the faces of my sons without saying a word.
I wept not, I was so turned to stone within. They wept; and my poor little Anselm said, ‘Thou lookest so, father, what aileth thee?’
Yet I did not weep; nor did I answer all that day, nor the night after, until the next sun came out upon the world.
When a little ray entered the woeful prison, and I discerned by their four faces my own very aspect,
both my hands I bit for woe; and they, thinking I did it through desire of eating, of a sudden rose,
and said, ‘Father, it will be far less pain to us if thou eat of us; thou didst clothe us with this wretched flesh, and do thou strip it off.’
I quieted me then, not to make them more sad: that day and the next we all stayed dumb. Ah, thou hard earth! why didst thou not open?
After we had come to the fourth day, Gaddo threw himself stretched out at my feet, saying, ‘My father, why dost thou not help me?’
Here he died: and, even as thou seest me, I saw the three fall one by one between the fifth day and the sixth; then I betook me,
already blind, to groping over each, and two days I called them after they were dead: then fasting had more power than grief.”
When he had said this, with his eyes distorted, he seized again the wretched skull with his teeth, that were strong as a dog’s upon the bone.
Ah Pisa! reproach of the people of the fair country where the si doth sound, since thy neighbors are slow to punish thee,
let Caprara and Gorgona move and make a hedge for Arno at its mouth, so that it drown every person in thee;
for if Count Ugolino had repute of having betrayed thee in thy towns, thou oughtest not to have set his sons on such a cross.
Their young age, thou modern Thebes! made Uguccione and the Brigata innocent, and the other two that the song names above.
We passed onward to where the ice roughly enswathes another folk, not turned downward, but all upon their backs.
Their very weeping lets them not weep, and the pain that finds a barrier on the eyes turns inward to increase the anguish;
for the first tears form a block, and like a visor of crystal fill all the cup beneath the eyebrow.
And although, because of the cold, as from a callus, all feeling had left its abode in my face,
it now seemed to me I felt some wind, wherefore I, “My Master, who moves this? Is not every vapor quenched here below?”
Whereon he to me, “Speedily shalt thou be where thine eye shall make answer to thee of this, beholding the cause that rains down the blast.”
And one of the wretches of the cold crust cried out to us, “O souls so cruel that the last station is given to you,
lift from my eyes the hard veils, so that I may vent the grief that swells my heart, a little ere the weeping re-congeal!”
Wherefore I to him, “If thou wilt that I relieve thee, tell me who thou art, and if I rid thee not, may it be mine to go to the bottom of the ice.”
He replied then, “I am friar Alberigo; I am he of the fruits of the bad garden, and here I receive a date for a fig.”
“Oh!” said I to him; “art thou now already dead?” And he to me, “How it may go with my body in the world above I bear no knowledge.
Such vantage hath this Ptolomaea that oftentime the soul falls hither ere Atropos hath given motion to it.
And that thou may the more willingly scrape the glassy tears from my face, know that soon as the soul betrays,
as I did, its body is taken from it by a demon, who thereafter governs it until its time be all revolved.
The soul falls headlong into this cistern, and perchance the body of the shade that here behind me winters still appears above;
thou oughtest to know him if thou comest down but now. He is Ser Branca d’ Oria, and many years have passed since he was thus shut up.”
“I think,” said I to him, “that thou deceivest me, for Branca d’ Oria is not yet dead, and he eats, and drinks, and sleeps, and puts on clothes.”
“In the ditch of the Malebranche above,” he said, “there where the tenacious pitch is boiling, Michel Zanche had not yet arrived
when this one left in his own stead a devil in his body, and in that of one of his near kin, who committed the treachery together with him.
But now stretch out hither thy hand; open my eyes for me.” And I opened them not for him, and to be rude to him was courtesy.
Ah Genoese! men strange to all morality and full of all corruption, why are ye not scattered from the world?
For with the worst spirit of Romagna I found one of you such that for his deeds in soul he is bathed in Cocytus,
and in body he seems still alive on earth.
