“Vexilla regis prodeunt inferni,
toward us; therefore look in front,”
said my Master; “if thou discernest him.”
As when a thick fog breathes,
or when our hemisphere grows dark with night,
a mill that the wind turns seems from afar
such a structure then it seemed to me I saw.
Then, because of the wind, I drew me behind
my Leader; for there was no other shelter.
I was now, and with fear I put it in verse,
there where the shades were wholly covered,
and showed through like a straw in glass.
Some are lying; some stand erect,
this on his head, and that on his soles;
another like a bow inverts his face to his feet.
When we had gone so far forward
that it pleased my Master to show me
the creature that had the fair semblance,
from before me he took himself and made me stop,
saying, “Behold Dis, and behold the place
where it is needful that with fortitude thou arm thee.”
How I became then chilled and hoarse,
ask it not, Reader, for I write it not,
because all speech would be little.
I did not die, and I did not remain alive.
Think now for thyself, if thou hast grain of wit,
what I became, deprived of one and the other.
The emperor of the woeful realm
from his midbreast issued forth from the ice;
and I match better with a giant, than the giants do with his arms.
that
See now how great must be whole
which corresponds to such parts.
If he was as fair as he now is foul,
and against his Maker lifted up his brow,
surely may all tribulation proceed from him.
Oh how great a marvel it seemed to me,
when I saw three faces on his head!
one in front, and that was red;
the others were two that were joined to this
above the very middle of each shoulder,
and they were joined together at the place of the crest;
and the right seemed between white and yellow,
the left was such to sight as those
who come from where the Nile flows valleyward.
Beneath each came forth two great wings,
of size befitting so huge a bird.
Sails of the sea never saw I such.
They had no feathers, but of a bat;
their fashion was; and he was flapping them
so that three winds went forth from him,
whereby Cocytus was all congealed.
With six eyes he was weeping, and over three chins
trickled the tears and bloody drivel.
With each mouth he was crushing with his teeth
a sinner, in manner of a brake,
so that he thus was making three of them woeful.
To the one in front the biting was nothing
to the clawing, so that sometimes his spine
remained all stripped of skin.
“That soul up there which has the greatest punishment,”
said the Master, “is Judas Iscariot,
who has his head within, and plies his legs outside.
Of the other two who have their heads down,
he who hangs from the black muzzle is Brutus;
see how he writhes and says no word;
and the other is Cassius, who seems so large-limbed.
But the night is rising again, and now
we must depart, for we have seen the whole.”
As was his pleasure, I clasped his neck,
and he took opportunity of time and place,
and when the wings were opened wide
he caught hold on the shaggy flanks;
from shag to shag he then descended
between the bushy hair and the frozen crusts.
When we were just where the thigh
turns on the thick of the haunch,
my Leader, with effort and stress of breath,
turned his head where he had his shanks,
and clambered by the hair as a man that ascends,
so that I thought to return again to hell.
“Cling fast hold, for by such stairs
said the Master, panting like one weary,
it behoves to depart from so much evil.”
Then he came forth through the opening of a rock,
and placed me upon its edge to sit;
then stretched toward me his cautious step.
I raised my eyes, and thought to see
Lucifer as I had left him,
and I saw him holding his legs upward.
And if I then became perplexed,
let the dull folk think it
that see not what that point is that I had passed.
“Rise up,” said the Master, “on thy feet;
the way is long and the road is difficult,
and already the sun unto mid-tierce returns.”
It was no hallway of a palace
where we were, but a natural dungeon
that had a bad floor, and lack of light.
“Before I tear me from the abyss,”
“my Master,” said I when I had risen up,
speak a little to me to draw me out of error.
Where is the ice? and this one, how is he fixed
thus upside down? and how in such short while
has the sun from eve to morn made transit?”
And he to me, “Thou imaginest
that thou still art on the other side of the centre where I laid hold
on the hair of the guilty Worm that pierces the world.
On that side wast thou so long as I descended;
when I turned thou didst pass the point
to which from all parts whatever has weight is drawn;
and thou art now arrived beneath the hemisphere
opposite to that which the great dry land
covers, and beneath whose zenith
the Man was slain who was born and lived without sin.
Thou hast thy feet upon the little sphere
which forms the other face of the Judecca.
Here it is morning when there it is evening;
and he who made for us a stairway with his hair
is still fixed even as he was before.
Upon this side he fell down from heaven,
and the earth, which before was spread out here,
through fear of him made of the sea a veil,
and came to your hemisphere; and perchance
to flee from him left here this empty space
that land which on this side appears and upward ran back.”
A place is there below, stretching as far from Beelzebub
as his tomb extends,
which not by sight is known, but by the sound
of a rivulet that here descends
along the hollow of a rock that it has gnawed
with its course that winds and little falls
My Leader and I through that hidden way,
entered to return to the bright world.
And without care, to have any repose,
we mounted up, he first and I second,
till I saw of those beauteous things
which heaven bears, through a round opening
and thence we came forth to see again the stars.
